# Simple Made Easy

* **Speaker: Rich Hickey**
* **Conference: [Strange Loop 2011](http://thestrangeloop.com) - Sept 2011**
* **Video: [http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy](http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy)**

[Time 0:00:00]

```
slide title: Simple Made Easy

Rich Hickey
```

Hi.  So who is ready for some more category theory?

[Audience applause]

You are all in the wrong room.

[Audience laughter] 

This talk I hope seems deceptively obvious.  One of the things that is
great about this conference is this is a pretty cutting edge crowd.  A
lot of you are adopting new technologies.  A lot of you are doing
functional programming.  And you may be nodding, saying yeah, yeah,
yeah through parts of this.  And if some of it is familiar, that is
great.  On the other hand, I think that I would hope that you would
come away from this talk with some tools you could use to help conduct
a similar kind of discussion to this talk with other people that you
are trying to convince to do the right thing.


[Time 0:01:00]

```
slide:

Simplicity is prerequisite for
reliability

            Edsger W. Dijkstra
```

So, I will start with an appeal to authority.  Simplicity is a
prerequisite for reliability.  I certainly agree with this.  I do not
agree with everything Dijkstra said, and I think he might have been
very wrong about proof in particular.  But I think he is right about
this.  We need to build simple systems if we want to build good
systems.  I do not think we focus enough on that.


[Time 0:01:23]

```
slide title: Word Origins

+ Simple              + Easy

  sim- plex             ease < aise < adjacens

  one fold/braid        lie near

  vs _complex_          vs _hard_
```

I love word origins.  They are tremendous fun.  One of the reasons why
they are fun is because words eventually come to mean whatever we all
accept them to mean.  You know, whatever is commonly understood to be
the meaning is what it means.  And it is often interesting to say,
well, I wish I could; I wish we could go back to what it really means
and use that.  And I think there is a couple of words that I am going
to use in this talk that I would love for you to come away knowing the
origins of and try to use more precisely, especially when talking
about software.

So the first word is "simple".  And the roots of this word are "sim"
and "plex", and that means one fold or one braid or twist.  And that
characteristic about being about one - literally - fold or twist ...
Of course one twist, what is one twist look like?  No twists, right,
actually.

And the opposite of this word is "complex", which means braided
together or folded together.  Being able to think about our software
in terms of whether or not it is folded together is sort of the
central point of this talk.

The other word we frequently use interchangeably with "simple" is the
word "easy".  And the derivation there is to a French word, and the
last step of this derivation is actually speculative, but I bought it
because it serves this talk really well, and that is from the Latin
word that is the root of "adjacent", which means "to lie near" and "to
be nearby".  And the opposite is "hard".  Of course, the root of
"hard" has nothing to do with lying near.  It does not mean "lie far
away".  It actually means like "strong", or tortuously so.


[Time 0:03:17]

```
slide title: Simple

+ One fold/braid      + But not

  + One role            + One instance

  + One task            + One operation

  + One concept       + About lack of
                        interleaving, not
  + One dimension       cardinality

                      + Objective
```

So if we want to try to apply "simple" to the kinds of work that we
do, we are going to start with this concept of having one braid.  And
look at it in a few different dimensions.  I thought it was
interesting in Eric's talk to talk about dimensions, because it is
definitely a big part of doing design work.  And so if we want to look
for simple things, we want to look for things that have sort of _one_
of something.  They do, they have one role.  They fulfill one task or
job.  They are about accomplishing sort of one objective.  They might
be about one concept like security.

And sort of overlapping with that is they may be about a particular
dimension of the problem that you are trying to solve.  The critical
thing there, though, is that when you are looking for something that
is simple, you want to see it have focus in these areas.  You do not
want to see it combining things.

On the other hand, we cannot get too fixated about "one".  In
particular, simple does not mean that there is only one of them.
Right?  It also does not mean an interface that only has one
operation.  So it is important to distinguish cardinality, right,
counting things, from actual interleaving.  What matters for
simplicity is that there is no interleaving, not that there is only
one thing, and that is very important.

Okay, the other critical thing about simple, as we have just described
it, right, is if something is interleaved or not, that is sort of an
objective thing.  You can probably go and look and see.  I do not see
any connections.  I do not see anywhere where this twists with
something else, so simple is actually an objective notion.  That is
also very important in deciding the difference between simple and
easy.


[Time 0:05:16]

```
slide title: Easy

+ Near, at hand              + Near our capabilities

  + on our hard drive, in    + Easy is _relative_
    our tool set, IDE, apt
    get, gem install ...

  + Near to our
    understanding/skill set

    + familiar
```

So let us look at "easy".  I think this notion of nearness is really,
really cool.  In particular, obviously there are many ways in which
something can be near.  Right?  There is sort of the physical notion
of being near.  Right?  Is something, you know, right there?  And I
think that is where the root of the word came from.  You know, this is
easy to obtain because it is nearby.  It is not in the next town.  I
do not have to take a horse or whatever to go get to it.

We do not have the same notion of physicality necessarily in our
software, but we do sort of have, you know, our own hard drive or our
own toolset, or it is sort of the ability to make things physically
near by getting them through things like installers and stuff like
that.

The second notion of nearness is something being near to our
understanding, right, or in our current skill set.  And I do not mean
in this case near to our understanding meaning a capability.  I mean
literally near something that we already know.  So the word in this
case is about being familiar.

I think that, collectively, we are infatuated with these two notions
of easy.  We are just so self-involved in these two aspects; it is
hurting us tremendously.  Right?  All we care about is, you know, can
I get this instantly and start running it in five seconds?  It could
be this giant hairball that you got, but all you care is, you know,
can you get it?

In addition, we are fixated on, oh, I cannot; I cannot read that.  Now
I cannot read German.  Does that mean German is unreadable?  No.  I do
not know German.  So, you know, this sort of approach is definitely
not helpful.  In particular, if you want everything to be familiar,
you will never learn anything new because it cannot be significantly
different from what you already know and not drift away from the
familiarity.

There is a third aspect of being easy that I do not think we think
enough about that is going to become critical to this discussion,
which now is being near to our capabilities.  And we do not like to
talk about this because it makes us uncomfortable, because what kind
of capabilities are we talking about?  If we are talking about easy in
the case of violin playing or piano playing or mountain climbing or
something like that, well, you know, I do not personally feel bad if I
do not play the violin well because I do not play the violin at all.

But the work that we are in is conceptual work, so when we start
talking about something being outside of our capability, well, you
know, it really starts trampling on our egos in a big way.  And so,
you know, due to a combination of hubris and insecurity, we never
really talk about whether or not something is outside of our
capabilities.  It ends up that it is not so embarrassing after all,
because we do not have tremendously divergent abilities in that area.

The last thing I want to say about "easy", and the critical thing to
distinguish it from "simple", is that easy is relative.  Right?
Playing the violin and reading German are really hard for me.  They
are easy for other people, certain other people.  So unlike simple
where we can go and look for interleavings, look for braiding, easy is
always going to be, you know, easy for whom, or hard for whom?  It is
a relative term.

The fact that we throw these things around sort of casually saying,
"Oh, I like to use that technology because it is simple," and when I
am saying simple, I mean easy.  And when I am saying easy, I mean
because I already know something that looks very much alike that.  It
is how this whole thing degrades and we can never have an objective
discussion about the qualities that matter to us in our software.


[Time 0:09:05]

```
slide title: Construct vs Artifact

+ We focus on experience of use of construct

  + programmer convenience

  + programmer replaceability

+ Rather than the long term results of use

  + software quality, correctness

  + maintenance, change

+ _We must assess constructs by their artifacts_
```

So, what is one critical area where we have to distinguish these two
things, and look at them from a perspective of them being easy and
being simple?  It has to do with constructs and artifacts.  Right?  We
program with constructs.  We have programming languages.  We use
particular libraries, and those things, in and of themselves, when we
look at them, like when we look at the code we write, have certain
characteristics in and of themselves.

But we are in a business of artifacts.  Right?  We do not ship source
code, and the user does not look at our source code and say, "Ah, that
is so pleasant."  Right?  No?  They run our software, and they run it
for a long period of time.  And, over time, we keep glomming more
stuff on our software.  All of that stuff, the running of it, the
performance of it, the ability to change it, all is an attribute of
the artifact, not the original construct.

But again, here we still focus so much on our experience of the use of
the construct.  Oh, look; I only had to type 16 characters.  Wow!
That is great.  No semicolons or things like that.  This whole notion
of sort of programmer convenience, again, we are _infatuated_ with it,
not to our benefit.

On the flipside it gets even worse.  Our employers are also infatuated
with it.  Right?  Those first two meanings of easy, what do they mean?
Right?  If I can get another programmer in here, right?  And they look
at your source code, and they think it is familiar, right?  And they
already know the toolkit, right?  So it is near at hand.  They have
always had the same tool in their toolkit.  They can read it.  I can
replace you.  It is a breeze, especially if I ignore the third notion
of easy, right, which is whether or not anybody can understand your
code, right.  Because they do not actually care about that.  They just
care that somebody can go sit in your seat, start typing.

So again, as sort of business owners, there is sort of, again, the
same kind of focus on those first two aspects of easy because it makes
programmers replaceable.

So we are going to contrast this with the impacts of long-term use.
Right?  What does it mean to use this long term?  And what is there?
What is there is all the meat.  Right?  Does the software do what it
is supposed to do?  Is it of high quality?  Can we rely on it doing
what it is supposed to do?  Can we fix problems when they arise?  And
if we are given a new requirement, can we change it?

These things have nothing to do with the construct, as we typed it in,
or very little to do with it, and have a lot to do with the attributes
of the artifact.  We have to start assessing our constructs based
around the artifacts, not around the look and feel of the experience
of typing it in or the cultural aspects of that.


[Time 0:12:13]

```
slide title: Limits

+ We can only hope to make reliable those things
  we can understand

+ We can only consider a few things at a time

+ Intertwined things must be considered together

+ Complexity undermines understanding

[ Simple line figure showing a person stick figure juggling three
  balls. ]
```

So let us talk a little bit about limits.  Oh, look; it does move.
This is just supposed to sort of lull you into this state where
everything I say seems true.

[Audience laughter]

Because I cannot use monads to do that.

[Audience laughter] 

This stuff is pretty simple logic, right?  How can we possibly make
things that are reliable that we do not understand?  It is very, very
difficult.  I think Professor Sussman made a great point saying there
is going to be this tradeoff, right?  As we make things more flexible
and extensible and dynamic in some possible futures for some kinds of
systems, we are going to make a tradeoff in our ability to understand
their behavior and make sure that they are correct.  But for the
things that we want to understand and make sure are correct, we are
going to be limited.  We are going to be limited to our understanding.

And our understanding is very limited, right?  There is the whole
notion of, you know, how many balls can you keep in the air at the
time, or how many things can you keep in mind at a time?  It is a
limited number, and it is a very small number, right?  So we can only
consider a few things and, when things are intertwined together, we
lose the ability to take them in isolation.

So if every time I think I pull out a new part of the software I need
to comprehend, and it is attached to another thing, I had to pull that
other thing into my mind because I cannot think about the one without
the other.  That is the nature of them being intertwined.  So every
intertwining is adding this burden, and the burden is kind of
combinatorial as to the number of things that we can consider.  So,
fundamentally, this complexity, and by complexity I mean this braiding
together of things, is going to limit our ability to understand our
systems.


[Time 0:14:06]

```
slide title: Change

+ Changes to software require analysis and decisions

+ What will be impacted?

+ Where do changes need to be made?

+ Your ability to reason about your program is critical to
  changing it without fear

  + Not talking about proof, just informal reasoning
```

So how do we change our software?  Apparently, I heard in a talk
today, that Agile and Extreme Programming have shown that refactoring
and tests allow us to make change with zero impact.

[Audience laughter] 

I never knew that.  I still do not know that.

[Audience laughter]

That is not actually a knowable thing.  That is phooey.

[Audience laughter]

Right?  If you are going to change software, you are going to need to
analyze what it does and make decisions about what it ought to do.
You know, I mean, at least you are going to have to go and say, "What
is the impact of this potential change?"  Right?  "And what parts of
the software do I need to go to to effect the change?"

You know, I do not care if you are using XP or Agile or anything else.
You are not going to get around the fact that if you cannot reason
about your program, you cannot make these decisions.  But I do want to
make clear here because a lot of people, as soon as they hear the
words reason about, they are like, "Oh, my God!  Are you saying that
you have to be able to prove programs?"  I am not.  I do not believe
in that.  I do not think that is an objective.  I am just talking
about informal reasoning, the same kind of reasoning we use every day
to decide what we are going to do.  We do not take out category theory
and say, "Woo," you know.  We actually can reason without it.  Thank
goodness.


[Time 0:15:31]

```
slide title: Debugging

+ What's true of every bug in the field?

+ It has passed the type checker

  + and all the tests

+ Your ability to reason about your program
  is critical to debugging

[ Photos of guard rails next to automobile roads. ]
```

So what about the other side?  Right?  There are two things you do
with the future of your software.  One is, you add new capabilities.
The other thing is you fix the ones you did not get, you know, done so
well.

And I like to ask this question: what is true of every bug found in the
field?

[Audience reply: Someone wrote it?]
[Audience reply: It got written.]

It got written.  Yes.  What is a more interesting fact about it?  It
passed the type checker.

[Audience laughter]

What else did it do?

[Audience reply: (Indiscernible)]

It passed all the tests.  Okay.  So now what do you do?  Right?  I
think we are in this world I would like to call guardrail programming.
Right?  It is really sad.  We are like: I can make change because I
have tests.  Who does that?  Who drives their car around banging
against the guardrail saying, "Whoa!  I am glad I have got these
guardrails because I would never make it to the show on time."

[Audience laughter]

Right?  And - and do the guardrails help you get to where you want to
go?  Like, do guardrails guide you places?  No.  There are guardrails
everywhere.  They do not point your car in any particular direction.

So again, we are going to need to be able to think about our program.
it is going to be critical.  All of our guardrails will have failed
us.  We are going to have this problem.  We are going to need to be
able to reason about our program.  Say, "Well, you know what?  I
think," because maybe if it is not too complex, I will be able to say,
"I know, through ordinary logic, it could not be in this part of the
program.  It must be in that part, and let me go look there first."
Things like that.


[Time 0:17:13]

```
slide title: Development Speed

+ Emphasizing ease gives early speed

+ Ignoring complexity will slow you down
  over the long haul

+ On throwaway or trivial projects,
  nothing much matters

[ Chart with Time increasing to the right on the X axis, Speed,
meaning development speed increasing on the Y axis.  Made-up chart
labeled "Easy" starts out with high development speed early on, then
gets lower as time progresses.  Made-up chart labeled "Simple" starts
out low or medium, and gradually grows over time. ]
```

Now, of course, everybody is going to start moaning, "But I have all
this speed.  I am agile.  I am fast.  You know, this easy stuff is
making my life good because I have a lot of speed."

What kind of runner can run as fast as they possibly can from the very
start of a race?

[Audience reply: Sprinter]

Right, only somebody who runs really short races, okay?

[Audience laughter]

But of course, we are programmers, and we are smarter than runners,
apparently, because we know how to fix that problem, right?  We just
fire the starting pistol every hundred yards and call it a new sprint.

[Audience laughter and applause]

I do not know why they have not figured that out, but -- right.  It is
my contention, based on experience, that if you ignore complexity, you
will slow down.  You will invariably slow down over the long haul.

Of course, if you are doing something that is really short term, you
do not need any of this.  You could write it, you know, in ones and
zeros.  And this is my really scientific graph.  You notice how none
of the axis are -- there is no numbers on it because I just completely
made it up.

[Audience laughter]

It is an experiential graph, and what it shows is: if you focus on
ease and ignore simplicity, so I am not saying you cannot try to do
both.  That would be great.  But if you focus on ease, you will be
able to go as fast as possible from the beginning of the race.  But no
matter what technology you use, or sprints or firing pistols, or
whatever, the complexity will eventually kill you.  It will kill you
in a way that will make every sprint accomplish less.  Most sprints be
about completely redoing things you have already done.  And the net
effect is you are not moving forward in any significant way.

Now if you start by focusing on simplicity, why cannot you go as fast
as possible right at the beginning?  Right, because some tools that
are simple are actually as easy to use as some tools that are not.
Why cannot you go as fast then?

[Audience response: You have to think.]

You have to think.  You have to actually apply some simplicity work to
the problem before you start, and that is going to give you this ramp
up.


[Time 0:19:35]

```
slide title: Easy Yet Complex?

+ Many complicating constructs are

  + Succinctly described

  + Familiar

  + Available

  + Easy to use

+ What matters is the complexity they _yield_

  + Any such complexity is _incidental_

[ Photo of a person using a loom with yarn, I believe. ]
```

So one of the problems I think we have is this conundrum that some
things that are easy actually are complex.  So let us look.  There are
a bunch of constructs that have complex artifacts that are very
succinctly described.  Right?  Some of the things that are really
dangerous to use are like so simple to describe.  They are incredibly
familiar, right?  If you are coming from object-orientation, you are
familiar with a lot of complex things.  They are very much available.
Right?

And they are easy to use.  In fact, by all measures, conventional
measures, you would look at them and say, "This is easy."  Right?  But
we do not care about that.  Right?  Again, the user is not looking at
our software, and they do not actually care very much about how good a
time we had when we were writing it.  Right?  What they care about is
what the program does, and if it works well, it will be related to
whether or not the output of those constructs were simple.  In other
words, what complexity did they yield?

When there is complexity there, we are going to call that incidental
complexity.  Right?  It was not part of what the user asked us to do.
We chose a tool.  It had some inherent complexity in it.  It is
incidental to the problem.  I did not put the definition in here, but
incidental is Latin for "your fault".

[Audience laughter]

And it is.  And I think you really have to ask yourself, you know, are
you programming with a loom?  You know, you are having a great time.
You are throwing that shuttle back and forth.  And what is coming out
the other side is this knotted, you know, mess.  I mean it may look
pretty, but you have this problem.  Right?  What is the problem?  The
problem is the knitted castle problem.  Right?  Do you want a knitted
castle?


[Time 0:21:31]

```
slide title: Benefits of Simplicity

+ Ease understanding

+ Ease of change

+ Easier debugging

+ Flexibility

  + policy

  + location etc

[Photo of knitted castle, and another made of Lego blocks. ]
```

What benefits do we get from simplicity?  We get ease of
understanding, right?  That is sort of definitional.  I contend we get
ease of change and easier debugging.  Other benefits that come out of
it, that are sort of on a secondary level, are increased flexibility.
And when we talk more about modularity and breaking things apart, we
will see where that falls.  Like the ability to change policies or
move things around, right?  As we make things simpler, we get more
independence of decisions because they are not interleaved, so I can
make a location decision.  It is orthogonal from a performance
decision.

And I really do want to, you know, ask the question, agile-ist or
whatever: Is having a test suite and refactoring tools going to make
changing the knitted castle faster than changing the Lego castle?  No
way.  Completely unrelated.


[Time 0:22:34]

```
slide title: Making Things Easy

+ Bring to hand by installing

  + getting approved for use

+ Become familiar by learning, trying

+ But mental capability?

  + not going to move very far

  + make things near by simplifying them
```

Okay.  So how do we make things easy?  Presumably, you know, the
objective here is not to just bemoan the software crisis, right?  So
what can we do to make things easier?  So we will look at those parts,
those aspects of being easy again.  There is a location aspect.
Making something at hand, putting it in our toolkit, that is
relatively simple.  Right?  We just install it.  Maybe it is a little
bit harder because we have to get somebody to say it is okay to use
it.

Then there is the aspect of how do I make it familiar, right?  I may
not have ever seen this before.  That is a learning exercise.  I have
got to go get a book, go take a tutorial, have somebody explain it to
me.  Maybe try it out.  Right?  Both these things we are driving.  We
are driving.  We install.  We learn.  It is totally in our hands.

Then we have this other part though, which is the mental capability
part.  And that is the part that is always hard to talk about, the
mental capability part.  Because, the fact is, we can learn more
things.  We actually cannot get much smarter.  We are not going to
move our brain closer to the complexity.  We have to make things near
by simplifying them.

But the truth here is not that they are these super, bright people who
can do these amazing things and everybody else is stuck, because the
juggling analogy is pretty close.  Right?  The average juggler can do
three balls.  The most amazing juggler in the world can do, like, 9
balls or 12 or something like that.  They cannot do 20 or 100.  We are
all very limited.  Compared to the complexity we can create, we are
all statistically at the same point in our ability to understand it,
which is not very good.  So we are going to have to bring things
towards us.

And because we can only juggle so many balls, you have to make a
decision.  How many of those balls do you want to be incidental
complexity and how many do you want to be problem complexity?  How
many extra balls?  Do you want to have somebody throwing you balls
that you have to try to incorporate in here?  Oh, use this tool.  And
you are like, whoa!  You know, more stuff.  Who wants to do that?


[Time 0:24:47]

```
slide title: Parens are Hard!

+ Not at hand for most         + Adding a data structure
                                 for grouping, e.g.
+ Nor familiar                   vectors, makes each
                                 simpler
+ But are they simple?
                                 + minimal effort can then
+ Not in CL/Scheme                 make them easy too

  + overloaded for calls
    and grouping

  + for those that bothered
    trying, this is a valid
    complexity complaint
```

All right, so let us look at a fact.

[Audience laughter]

I have been on the other side of this complaint, and I like it.  We
can look at it really quickly only because it is not -- this analysis
has nothing to do with the usage.  This complexity analysis is just
about the programmer experience.  So parens are hard.  Right?  They
are not at hand for most people who have not otherwise used it.

And what does that mean?  It means that, like, they do not have an
editor that knows how to do, you know, paren matching or move stuff
around structurally, or they have one and they have never loaded the
mode that makes that happen.  Totally given, right?  It is not at
hand, nor is it familiar.  I mean, everybody has seen parentheses, but
they have not seen them on that side of the method.

[Audience laughter]

I mean [laughter] that is just crazy!

[Audience laughter]

But, you know, I think this is your responsibility, right, to fix
these two things, as a user, as a potential user.  You have got to do
this.  But we could dig deeper.  Let us look at the third thing.  Did
you actually give me something that was simple?  Is a language built
all out of parens simple?  In the case I am saying, right, is it free
of interleaving and braiding?  And the answer is no.  Right?

Common LISP and Scheme are not simple in this sense, in their use of
parens, because the use of parentheses in those languages is
overloaded.  Parens wrap calls.  They wrap grouping.  They wrap data
structures.  And that overloading is a form of complexity by the
definition, you know, I gave you.  Right?

And so, if you actually bothered to get your editor set up and learn
that the parenthesis goes on the other side of the verb, this was
still a valid complaint.  Now, of course, everybody was saying easy,
and it is hard, it is complex, and they were using these words really
weakly.  Right?  But it was hard for a couple reasons you could solve,
and it was not simple for a reason that was the fault of the language
designer, which was that there was overloading there.  And we can fix
that.  Right?  We can just add another data structure.

It does not make LISP not LISP to have more data structures.  Right?
it is still a language defined in terms of its own data structures.
But having more data structures in play means that we can get rid of
this overloading in this case, which then makes it your fault again,
because now the simplicity is back in the construct, and it is just a
familiarity thing, which you can solve for yourself.


[Time 0:27:33]

```
slide:

LISP programmers know the value of
everything and the cost of nothing.

                        Alan Perlis
```

Okay.  This was an old dig at LISP programmers.  I am not totally sure
what he was talking about.  I believe it was a performance related
thing.  That LISPers, they consed up all this memory, and they did all
this evaluation, and it was a pig.  LISP programmers at that time were
-- LISP programs at that time were complete pigs relative to the
hardware.  So, you know, they knew the value of all these constructs,
right, this dynamic nature.  These things are all great.  They are
valuable, but there was this performance cost.

I would like to lift this whole phrase and apply it to all of us right
now.  As programmers, we are looking at all kinds of things, and I
just see it.  You know, read Hacker News or whatever.  It is like, oh,
look; this thing has this benefit.  Oh, great.  I am going to do that.
Oh, but this has this benefit.  Oh, that is cool.  Oh, that is
awesome.  You know, that is shorter.  You never see in these
discussions: was there a tradeoff?  Is there any downside?  You know,
is there anything bad that comes along with this?  Never.  Nothing.

It is just like we look all for benefits.  So as programmers now, I
think we are looking all for benefits, and we are not looking
carefully enough at the byproducts.


[Time 0:28:49]

```
slide title: What's in _your_ Toolkit?

     Complexity            Simplicity

  State, Objects             Values

      Methods           Functions, namespaces

       vars               Managed refs

Inheritance, switch,    Polymorphism a la carte
     matching

      Syntax                 Data

Imperative loops, fold    Set functions

      Actors                Queues

       ORM             Declarative data manipulation

   Conditionals             Rules

  Inconsistency           Consistency
```

So, what is in your toolkit?  I have these two columns.  One says
complexity and one says simplicity.  The simplicity column just means
simpler.  It does not mean that the things over there are purely
simple.  Now I did not label these things bad and good.  I am leaving
your minds to do that.

[Audience laughter]

So what things are complex and what are the simple replacements?  I am
going to dig into the details on these, so I will not actually explain
why they are complex, but I am going to state and objects are complex,
and values are simple and can replace them in many cases.  I am going
to say methods are complex, and functions are simple.  And namespaces
are simple.  The reason why methods are there are because often the
space of methods, the class or whatever, is also a mini, very poor
namespace.

Vars are complex and variables are complex.  Managed references are
also complex, but they are simpler.  Inheritance, switch statements,
pattern matching are all complex, and polymorphism a la carte is
simple.  Now remember the meaning of simple.  The meaning of simple
means unentangled, not twisted together with something else.  It does
not mean I already know what it means.  Simple does not mean I already
know what it means.

Okay.  Syntax is complex.  Data is simple.  Imperative loops, fold
even, which seems kind of higher level, still has some implications
that tie two things together, whereas set functions are simpler.
Actors are complex, and queues are simpler.  ORM is complex, and
declarative data manipulation is simpler.  Even Eric said that in his
talk.  He said it really fast near the end.

[Audience laughter]

Oh, yeah, and eventual consistency is really hard for programmers.

Conditionals are complex in interesting ways, and rules can be
simpler.  And inconsistency is very complex.  It is almost
definitionally complex, because consistent means to stand together, so
inconsistent means to stand apart.  That means taking a set of things
that are standing apart and trying to think about them all at the same
time.  It is inherently complex to do that.  And anybody who has tried
to use a system that is eventually consistent knows that.


[Time 0:31:35]

```
slide title: Complect

+ _To interleave, entwine, braid_

  + archaic

+ Don't do it!

  + Complecting things is the
    source of complexity

+ Best to avoid in the first place

[ Drawing showing steps starting from having four parallel strands,
  and step by step braiding them together. ]
```

Okay.  So there is this really cool word called "complect".  I found
it.

[Audience laughter]

I love it.  It means to interleave or entwine or braid.  Okay?  I want
to start talking about what we do to our software that makes it bad.
And I do not want to say braid or entwine because it does not really
have the good/bad connotation that complect has.  Complect is
obviously bad.  Right?

[Audience laughter]

It happens to be an archaic word, but there are no rules that say you
cannot start using them again, so I am going to use them for the rest
of the talk.  So what do you know about complect?  It is bad.  Do not
do it.  Right?  This is where complexity comes from: complecting.  It
is very simple.

[Audience laughter]

And in particular, it is something that you want to avoid in the first
place.  Look at this diagram.  Look at the first one.  Look at the
last one.  Right?  It is the same stuff in both those diagrams.  It is
the same strips!  What happened?  They got complected.

[Audience laughter]

And now it is hard to understand the bottom diagram from the top one,
but it is the same stuff.  You are doing this all the time.  You can
make a program a hundred different ways.  Some of them, it is just
hanging there.  It is all straight.  You look at it.  You say, I see
it is four lines, this program.  Right?  Then you could type in four
lines in another language or with a different construct, and you end
up with this knot, so we have got to take care of that.


[Time 0:33:07]

```
slide title: Compose

+ _To place together_

+ Composing simple components
  is the key to robust software

[ Drawing of two Lego blocks apart, then connected together. ]
```

So complect actually means to braid together.  And compose means to
place together.  And we know that, right?  Everybody keeps telling us.
What we want to do is make composable systems.  We just want to place
things together, which is great, and I think there is no disagreement.
Right?  Composing simple components, simple in that same respect, is
the way we write robust software.


[Time 0:33:34]

```
slide title: Modularity and Simplicity
```
![00:33:35 Modularity and Simplicity](SimpleMadeEasy/00.33.35.jpg)

So it is simple, right?  All we need to do is -- everybody knows this.
I am up here just telling you stuff you know.  We can make simple
systems by making them modular, right?  We are done.  I am like
halfway through my talk.  I do not even know if I am going to finish.
It is so simple.  This is it.  This is the key.

No, it is obviously not the key.  Who has seen components that have
this kind of characteristic?  I will raise my hand twice because not
enough people are raising their hands.  It is ridiculous, right?  What
happens?  You can write modular software with all kinds of
interconnections between them.  They may not call each other, but they
are completely complected.

![00:34:19 Modularity and Simplicity - build slide](SimpleMadeEasy/00.34.19.jpg)

And we know how to solve this.  It has nothing to do with the fact
that there are two things.  It has to do with what those two things
are allowed to think about, if you want to really anthropomorphize.

![00:34:31 Modularity and Simplicity - build slide](SimpleMadeEasy/00.34.31.jpg)

And what do we want to make things allowed to think about, and only
these things?  Some abstractions.  I do not know if that is coming out
that well.  That is a dashed white version of the top of a Lego.  That
is all we want to limit things to, because now the blue guy does not
really know anything about the yellow guy, and the yellow guy does not
really know anything about the blue guy, and they have both become
simple.

So it is very important that you do not associate simplicity with
partitioning and stratification.  They do not imply it.  They are
enabled by it.  If you make simple components, you can horizontally
separate them, and you can vertically stratify them.  Right?  But you
can also do that with complex things, and you are going to get no
benefits.

And so I would encourage you to be particularly careful not to be
fooled by code organization.  There are tons of libraries that look,
oh, look, there is different classes; there are separate classes.
They call each other in sort of these nice ways, right?  Then you get
out in the field and you are like, oh, my God!  This thing presumes
that that thing never returns the number 17.  What is that?


[Time 0:35:37]

```
slide title: State is Never Simple

+ Complects value and time

+ It _is_ easy, in the at-hand and familiar sense

+ Interweaves everything that touches it, directly or
  indirectly

  + Not mitigated by modules, encapsulation

+ Note - this has nothing to do with asynchrony
```

Okay.  I am not going to get up here and tell you state is awesome.  I
like state.  I am not a functional whatever guy, whatever.  I am going
to say instead: I did this, and it sucked.  I did years and years:
C++, you know, He-Man, stateful programming.  It is really not fun.
It is not good.  It is never simple.

Having state in your program is never simple, because it has a
fundamental complecting that goes on in its artifacts.  It complects
value and time.  You do not have the ability to get a value
independent of time.  And sometimes not an ability to get a value in
any proper sense at all.  But again, it is a great example.  This is
easy.  It is totally familiar.  It is at hand.  It is in all the
programming languages.  This is so easy.  This complexity is so easy.

And you cannot get rid of it.  Everything -- I have modularity.  That
assignment statement is inside a method.  Well, if every time you call
that method with the same arguments, you can get a different result,
guess what happened?  That complexity just leaked right out of there.
It does not matter that you cannot see the variable.  If the thing
that is wrapping it is stateful, and the thing that is wrapping that
is still stateful, in other words by stateful I mean every time you
ask it the same question you get a different answer, you have this
complexity and it is like poison.

It is like dropping some dark liquid into a vase.  It is just going to
end up all over the place.  The only time you can really, you know,
get rid of it is when you put it inside something that is able to
present a functional interface on the outside, a true functional
interface: same input, same output.  You cannot mitigate it through
the ordinary code organization things.

And note in particular, I did not talk about concurrency here.  This
is not about concurrency.  This has nothing to do with concurrency.
It is about your ability to understand your program.

Your program was out there.  It is single threaded.  It did not work.
All the tests passed.  It made it through the type checker.  Figure
out what happened.  If it is full of variables, what are you going to
need to try to do?  Recreate the state that was happening at the
client when it went bad.  Is that going to be easy?  No!


[Time 0:38:00]

```
slide title: Not all refs/vars are Equal

+ None make state simple

+ All warn of state, help reduce it

+ Clojure and Haskell refs _compose_ value and time

  + Allow you to extract a simple value

  + Provide abstractions of time

+ Does your var do that?
```

But we fixed this, right?  Your language, your new, shiny language has
something called var, or maybe it has refs or references.  None of
these constructs make state simple.  That is the first, primary thing.
I do not want to say that even of Clojure's constructs.  They do not
make state simple in the case I am talking about, in the nature of
simple I am talking about.

But they are not the same.  They all do warn you when you have state,
and that is great.  Most people who are using a language where
mutability is not the default and you have to go out of your way to
get it, finds that the programs you end up writing have dramatically,
like orders of magnitude, less state than they would otherwise,
because they never needed all the other state in the first place.  So
that is really great.

But I will call out Clojure and Haskell's references as being
particularly superior in dealing with this, because they compose
values and time.  There are actually little constructs that do two
things.  They have some abstraction over time and the ability to
extract a value.  That is really important, because that is your path
back to simplicity.  If I have a way to get out of this thing and get
a value out, I can continue with my program.  If I have to pass that
variable to somebody else or a reference to something that is going to
find the variable every time through the varying thing, I am poisoning
the rest of my system.  So look at the var in your language and ask if
it does the same thing.


[Time 0:39:27]

```
slide title: The Complexity Toolkit

      Construct             Complects

        State        Everything that touches it

       Objects        State, identity, value

       Methods     Function and state, namespaces

        Syntax            Meaning, order

     Inheritance             Types

   Switch/matching      Multiple who/what pairs

     var(iable)s           Value, time

Imperative loops, fold      what/how

      Actors                what/who

       ORM                    OMG

   Conditionals         Why, rest of program
```

All right, let us see why things are complex.  State, we already
talked about.  It complects everything it touches.  Objects complect
state, identity, and value.  They mix these three things up in a way
that you cannot extricate the parts.

Methods complect function and state, ordinarily, right?  In addition,
in some languages, they complect namespaces.  Derive from two things
in Java that have the same name method, and [hand gesture with sounds
like explosion].  It does not work.

Syntax, interestingly, complects meaning and order, often in a very
unidirectional way.  Professor Sussman made the great point about data
versus syntax, and it is super true.  I do not care how much you
really love the syntax of your favorite language.  It is inferior to
data in every way.

Inheritance complects types.  These two types are complected.  That is
what it means: inheritance, complecting.  It is definitional.

Switching and matching, they complect multiple pairs of who is going
to do something and what happens, and they do it all in one place in a
closed way.  That is very bad.

Vars and variables, again, complect value and time, often in an
inextricable way.  You cannot obtain a value.  We saw a picture during
a keynote yesterday of this amazing memory where you could
de-reference an address and get an object out.  I want to get one of
those computers.  Have you ever used one of those computers?  I cannot
get one.  I called Apple, and they were like, pff, no.

The only thing you can ever get out of a memory address is a word, a
scalar, the thing that was all derided.  Recovering a composite object
from an address is not something computers do, none of the ones that
we have.  So variables have the same problem.  You cannot recover a
composite mutable thing with one de-reference.

Loops and fold: loops are pretty obviously complecting what you are
doing and how to do it.  Fold is a little bit more subtle because it
seems like this nice, somebody else is taking care of it.  But it does
have this implication about the order of things, this left to right
bit.

Actors complect what is going to be done and who is going to do it.

[Audience laughter]

Now Professor Sussman said all these talks have acronyms, and I could
not actually modify my slides in time, so object relational mapping
has oh, my God complecting going on.  You cannot even begin to talk
about how bad it is, right?  And, you know, if you are going to do,
like, duals, what is the dual of value?  Is it co-value?  What is a
co-value?  It is an inconsistent thing.  Who wants that?

And conditionals, I think, are interesting.  This is sort of more
cutting edge area.  We have a bunch of sort of rules about what our
programs are supposed to do.  It is strewn all throughout the program.
Can we fix that?  Because that is complected with the structure of the
program and the organization of the program.


[Time 0:42:55]

```
slide title: The Simplicity Toolkit

   Construct           Get it via ...

     Values     final, persistent collections

   Functions     a.k.a. stateless methods

   Namespaces        language support

      Data          Maps, arrays, sets,
                      XML, JSON etc

Polymorphism a la    Protocols, type
     carte              classes

   Managed refs    Clojure/Haskell refs

  Set functions        Libraries

     Queues            Libraries

Declarative data     SQL/LINQ/Datalog
   manipulation

      Rules         Libraries, Prolog

   Consistency     Transactions, values
```

So if you take away two things from this talk, one would be the
difference between the words simple and easy.  The other, I would
hope, would be the fact that we can create precisely the same programs
we are creating right now with these tools of complexity, with
dramatically drastically simpler tools.  I did C++ for a long time.  I
did Java.  I did C#.  I know how to make big systems in those
languages, and I completely believe you do not need all that
complexity.  You can write as sophisticated a system with dramatically
simpler tools, which means you are going to be focusing on the system,
what it is supposed to do, instead of all the gook that falls out of
the constructs you are using.

So I would love to say the first step in getting a simpler life is to
just choose simpler stuff.  Right?  So if you want values, usually you
can get it.  Most languages have something like values.  Final or val,
you know, lets you, like, declare something as being immutable.  You
do want to find some persistent collections because the harder thing
in a lot of languages is getting aggregates that are values.  You have
got to find a good library for that, or use a language where that is
the default.

[Audience laughter]

Functions, most languages have them.  Thank goodness.  If you do not
know what they are, they are like stateless methods.

[Audience laughter]

Namespaces is something you really need the language to do for you
and, unfortunately, it is not done very well in a lot of places.
Data: Please!  We are programmers.  We supposedly write data
processing programs.  There are all these programs that do not have
any data in them.  They have all these constructs we put around it and
globbed on top of data.

Data is actually really simple.  There are not a tremendous number of
variations in the essential nature of data.  There are maps.  There
are sets.  There are linear, sequential things.  There are not a lot
of other conceptual categories of data.  We create hundreds of
thousands of variations that have nothing to do with the essence of
this stuff, and make it hard to write programs that manipulate the
essence of the stuff.  We should just manipulate the essence of the
stuff.  It is not hard.  It is simpler.

Also, the same thing for communications.  Are we all not glad we do
not use the Unix method of communicating on the Web?  Right?  Any
arbitrary command string can be the argument list for your program,
and any arbitrary set of characters can come out the other end.  Let
us all write parsers.

[Audience laughter]

No, I mean it is a problem.  It is a source of complexity.  So we can
get rid of that.  Just use data.

The biggest thing, I think, the most desirable thing, the most
esoteric, this is tough to get, but boy when you have it your life is
completely, totally different thing, is polymorphism a la carte.
Clojure protocols and Haskell type classes, and constructs like that,
give you the ability to independently say, "I have data structures.  I
have definitions of sets of functions, and I can connect them
together."  And those are three independent operations.  In other
words, the genericity is not tied to anything in particular.  It is
available a la carte.  I do not know of a lot of library solutions for
languages that do not have it.

I already talked about manage references and how to get them.  Maybe
you can use closures from different Java languages.

Set functions, you can get from libraries.  Queues, you can get from
libraries.  You do not need special communication language.

You can get declarative data manipulation by using SQL or learning
SQL, finally.  Or something like LINQ, or something like Datalog.

I think these last couple of things are harder.  We do not have a lot
of ways to do this well-integrated with our languages, I think,
currently.  LINQ is an effort to do that.

Rules, declarative rule systems, instead of embedding a bunch of
conditionals in our raw language at every point of decision.  It is
nice to sort of gather that stuff and put it over some place else.
You can get rule systems in libraries, or you can use languages like
Prolog.  If you want consistency, you need to use transactions, and
you need to use values.  There are reasons why you might have to get
off of this list, but, boy, there is no reason why you should not
start with it.


[Time 0:47:20]

```
slide title: Environmental Complexity

+ Resources, e.g. memory, CPU

+ _Inherent_ complexity in implementation space

  + All components contend for them

+ Segmentation

  + waste

+ Individual policies don't compose

  + just make things more complex
```

Okay.  There is a source of complexity that is really difficult to
deal with, and not your fault.  I call it environmental complexity.
Our programs end up running on machines next to other programs, next
to other parts of themselves, and they contend for stuff: memory, CPU
cycles, and things like that.

Everybody is contending for it.  This is an inherent complexity.
Inherent is Latin for "not your fault".  In the implementation space
and, no, this is not part of the problem, but it is part of the
implementation.  You cannot go back to the customer and say, "the
thing you wanted is not good because I have GC problems."  But the GC
problems and stuff like that, they come into play.

There are not a lot of great solutions.  You can do segmentation.  You
can say this is your memory, this is your memory, this is your memory,
this is your CPU and your CPU.  But there is tremendous waste in that,
right, because you pre-allocate.  You do not use everything.  You do
not have sort of dynamic nature.

But the problem I think we are facing, and it is not one for which I
have a solution at the moment, is that the policies around this stuff
do not compose.  If everybody says, "I will just size my thread pool
to be the number of," you know, of course.  How many times can you do
that in one program?  Not a lot and have it still work out.

So, unfortunately, a lot of things like that, splitting that stuff up
and making it an individual decision, is not actually making things
simpler.  It is making things complex because that is a decision that
needs to be made by someone who has better information.  And I do not
think we have a lot of good sources for organizing those decisions in
single places in our systems.


[Time 0:49:03]

```
slide:

Programming, when stripped of all its
circumstantial irrelevancies, boils down
to no more and no less than very
effective thinking so as to avoid
unmastered complexity, to very vigorous
separation of your many different
concerns.

                     Edsger W. Dijkstra
```

This is a hugely long quote.  Basically, it says programming is not
about typing, like this [gestures of typing on a keyboard].  It is
about thinking.


[Time 0:49:18]

```
slide title: Abstraction for Simplicity

+ Abstract

  + _drawn away_

+ vs Abstraction as complexity _hiding_

+ Who, What, When, Where, Why and How

+ I don't know, I don't want to know
```

So the next phase here -- I have got to move a little bit quicker --
is how do we design simple things of our own?  So the first part of
making things simple is just to choose constructs that have simple
artifacts.  But we have to write our own constructs sometimes, so how
do we abstract for simplicity?  And abstract, again, here is an actual
definition, not made up one.  It means "to draw something away".  And,
in particular, it means to draw away from the physical nature of
something.

I do want to distinguish this from, that sometimes people use this
term, really grossly, to just mean "hiding stuff".  That is not what
abstraction is, and that is not going to help you in this space.

There are two -- you know, I cannot totally explain how this is done.
It is really the job of designing, but one approach you can take is
just to do who, what, when, where, why, and how.  If you just go
through those things, and sort of look at everything you are deciding
to do and say, "What is the who aspect of this?  What is the what
aspect of it?"  This can help you take stuff apart.

The other thing is to maintain this approach that says, "I do not
know; I do not want to know."  I once said that so often during a C++
course I was teaching that one of the students made me a shirt.  It
was a Booch diagram, because we did not have whatever it is now, the
unified one.  And every line just said that.  That is what you want to
do.  You really just do not want to know.


[Time 0:50:39]

```
slide title: What

+ Operations

+ Form abstractions from related sets of functions

  + _Small_ sets

+ Represent with polymorphism constructs

+ Specify inputs, outputs, semantics

  + Use only values and other abstractions

+ Don't complect with:

  + How
```

All right, so what is what?  What is the operations.  What is what we
want to accomplish.  We are going to form abstractions by taking
functions and, more particularly, sets of functions, and giving them
names.  In particular -- and you are going to use whatever your
language lets you use.  If you only have interfaces, you will use
that.  If you have protocols or type classes, you will use those.  All
those things are in the category of the things you use to make sets of
functions that are going to be abstractions.  And they are really sets
of specifications of functions.

The point I would like to get across today is just that they should be
really small, much smaller than what we typically see.  Java
interfaces are huge, and the reason why they are huge is because Java
does not have union types, so it is inconvenient to say this function
takes, you know, something that does this and that and that.  You have
to make a this and that and that interface, so we see these giant
interfaces.  And the thing with those giant interfaces is that it is a
lot harder to break up those programs, so you are going to represent
them with your polymorphism constructs.

They are specifications, right?  They are not actually the
implementations.  They should only use values and other abstractions
in their definitions.  So you are going to define interfaces or
whatever, type classes, that only take interfaces and type classes, or
values, and return them.

And the biggest problem you have when you are doing this part of
design is if you complect this with "how".  You can complect it with
"how" by jamming them together and saying, "here is just a concrete
function" instead of having an interface, or "here is a concrete
class" instead of having an interface.  You can also complect it with
"how" more subtly by having some implication of the semantics of the
function dictate how it is done.  Fold is an example of that.

Strictly separating "what" from "how" is the key to making "how"
somebody else's problem.  If you have done this really well, you can
pawn off the work of "how" on somebody else.  You can say, "database
engine, you figure out how to do this thing" or, "logic engine, you
figure out how to search for this."  I do not need to know.


[Time 0:52:41]

```
slide title: Who

+ Entities implementing abstractions

+ Build from subcomponents direct-injection style

  + Pursue _many_ subcomponents

    + e.g. policy

+ Don't complect with:

  + component details

  + other entities
```

"Who" is about, like, data or entities.  These are the things that our
abstractions are going to be connected to eventually, depending on how
your technology works.  You want to build components up from
subcomponents in a sort of direct injection style.  You do not want
to, like, hardwire what the subcomponents are.  You want to, as much
as possible, take them as arguments because that is going to give you
more programmatic flexibility in how you build things.

You should have probably many more subcomponents than you have.  So
you want really much smaller interfaces than you have, and you want to
have more subcomponents than you probably are typically having.
Because usually you have none.  And then maybe you have one when you
decide, oh, I need to farm out policy.  If you go in saying, "this is
a job, and I have done who, what, when, where, why," and I found five
components, do not feel bad.  That is great.  You are winning
massively by doing that.  You know, split out policy and stuff like
that.

And the thing that you have to be aware of when you are building, you
know, the definition of a thing from subcomponents is any of those
kind of, you know, yellow thinking about blue, blue thinking about
yellow kind of hidden detail dependencies.  So you want to avoid that.


[Time 0:53:45]

```
slide title: How

+ Implementing logic

+ Connect to abstractions and entities via polymorphism
  constructs

+ Prefer abstractions that don't dictate _how_

  + Declarative tools

+ Don't complect with

  + anything
```

How things happen, this is the actual implementation code, the work of
doing the job.  You strictly want to connect these things together
using those polymorphism constructs.  That is the most powerful thing.
Yeah, you can use a switch statement.  You could use pattern matching.
But it is glomming all this stuff together.

If you use one of these systems, you have an open polymorphism policy,
and that is really powerful, especially if it is runtime open.  But
even if it is not, it is better than nothing.

And again, beware of abstractions that dictate how in some subtle way
because, when you do that, you are really, you are nailing the person
down the line who has to do the implementation.  You are tying their
hands.  So the more declarative things are, the better, the better
things work.  And the thing that -- I mean, "how" is sort of the
bottom, right?  Do not mix this up with anything else.  All these
implementations should be islands as much as possible.


[Time 0:54:40]

```
slide title: When, Where

+ Strenuously avoid complecting these with anything in
  the design

+ Can seep in via directly connected objects

  + Use queues
```

When and where, this is pretty simple.  I think you just have to
strenuously avoid complecting this with anything.  I see it
accidentally coming in, mostly when people design systems with
directly connected objects.  So if you know your program is
architected such that this thing deals with the input, and then this
thing has to do the next part of the job.  Well, if thing A calls
thing B, you just complected it.  Right?  And now you have a when and
where thing, because now A has to know where B is in order to call B,
and when that happens is whenever A does it.

Stick a queue in there.  Queues are the way to just get rid of this
problem.  If you are not using queues extensively, you should be.  You
should start right away, like right after this talk.

[Audience laughter]


[Time 0:55:33]

```
slide title: Why

+ The policy and rules of the application

+ Often strewn everywhere

  + in conditionals

  + complected with control flow etc

+ Explore rules and declarative logic systems
```

And then there is the "why" part.  This is sort of the policy and
rules.  This is -- I think this is hard for us.  We typically put this
stuff all over our application.  Now if you ever have to talk to a
customer about what the application does, it is really difficult to
sit with them in source code and look at it.

Now, if you have one of these pretend testing systems that lets you
write English strings so the customer can look at that, that is just
silly.  You should have code that does the work that somebody can look
at, which means to try to, you know, put this stuff some place
outside.  Try to find a declarative system or a rule system that lets
you do this work.


[Time 0:56:09]

```
slide title: Information _is_ Simple

+ Don't ruin it

+ By hiding it behind a micro-language

  + i.e. a class with information-specific methods

  + thwarts generic data composition

  + ties logic to representation du jour

+ Represent data as data
```

Finally, in this area, information: it is simple.  The only thing you
can possibly do with information is ruin it.

[Audience laughter]

Don't do it!  Right?  Don't do this stuff.  I mean, we have got
objects.  Objects were made to, like, encapsulate IO devices, so there
is a screen, but I cannot, like, touch the screen, so I have the
object.  Right?  There is a mouse.  I cannot touch the mouse, so there
is an object.  Right?  That is all they are good for.  They were never
supposed to be applied to information.  And we apply them to
information.  That is just wrong.  It is wrong.

But I can now say it is wrong for a reason.  It is wrong because it is
complex.  In particular, it ruins your ability to build generic data
manipulation things.  If you leave data alone, you can build things
once that manipulate data, and you can reuse them all over the place,
and you know they are right once and you are done.

The other thing about it, which also applies to ORM, is that it will
tie your logic to representational things, which again tying,
complecting, intertwining.  So represent data is data.  Please start
using maps and sets directly.  Don't feel like I have to write a class
now because I have a new piece of information.  That is just silly.


[Time 0:57:19]

```
slide:

Simplicity is not an objective in
art, but one achieves simplicity
despite one's self by entering
into the real sense of things

                 Constantin Brancusi
```


[Time 0:57:22]

```
slide title: Simplifying

+ Identifying individual threads/roles/dimensions

+ Following through the user story/code

+ Disentangling

[ several photos and drawings of knots ]
```

So the final aspect, right, so we choose simple tools.  We write
simple stuff.  And then sometimes we have to simplify other people's
stuff.  In particular, we may have to simplify the problem space or
some code that somebody else wrote.  This is a whole separate talk I
am not going to get into right now.  But the job is essentially one of
disentangling, right?  We know what is complex.  It is entangled.  So
what do we need to do?  We need to somehow disentangle it.

You are going to get this.  You are going to need to first sort of
figure out where it is going.  You are going to have to follow stuff
around and eventually label everything.  This is the start.  This is
roughly what the process is like.  But again, it is a whole separate
talk to try to talk about simplification.

All right, I am going to wrap up in a couple of slides.


[Time 0:58:13]

```
slide title: Simplicity is a Choice

+ Requires vigilance, sensibilities and care

+ Your sensibilities equating simplicity with ease and
  familiarity are wrong

  + Develop sensibilities around entanglement

+ Your 'reliability' tools (testing, refactoring, type systems)
  don't care

  + and are quite peripheral to producing good software
```

The bottom line is: simplicity is a choice.  It is your fault if you
do not have a simple system.  And I think we have a culture of
complexity.  To the extent we all continue to use these tools that
have complex outputs, we are just in a rut.  We are just
self-reinforcing.  And we have to get out of that rut.

But again, like I said, if you are already saying, "I know this.  I
believe you.  I already use something better.  I have already used
that whole right column," then hopefully this talk will give you the
basis for talking with somebody else who does not believe you.
Talk about simplicity versus complexity.

But it is a choice.  It requires constant vigilance.  We already saw
that guardrails do not yield simplicity.  They do not really help us
here.

It requires sensibilities and care.  Your sensibilities about
simplicity being equal to ease of use are wrong.  They are just simply
wrong.  Right?  We saw the definitions of simple and easy.  They are
completely different things.  Easy is not simple.

You have to start developing sensibilities around entanglement.  That
is what you have to -- you have to have entanglement radar.  You want
to look at some software and say, ugh!  You know, not that I do not
like the names you used, or the shape of the code, or there was a
semicolon.  That is also important, too.  But you want to start seeing
complecting.  You want to start seeing interconnections between things
that could be independent.  That is where you are going to get the
most power.

All the reliability tools you have, since they are not about
simplicity, they are all secondary.  They just do not touch the core
of this problem.  They are safety nets, but they are nothing more than
that.


[Time 0:59:52]

```
slide title: Simplicity _Made Easy_

+ Choose simple constructs over complexity-generating
  constructs

  + It's the artifacts, not the authoring

+ Create abstractions with simplicity as a basis

+ Simplify the problem space before you start

+ Simplicity often means making more things, not fewer

+ Reap the benefits!
```

So, how do we make simplicity easy?  Right?  We are going to choose
constructs with simpler artifacts and avoid constructs that have
complex artifacts.  It is the artifacts.  It is not the authoring.  As
soon as you get in an argument with somebody about, oh, we should be
using whatever, get that sorted out because, however they feel about
the shape of the code they type in is independent from this.  And this
is the thing you have to live with.

We are going to try to create abstractions that have simplicity as a
basis.  We are going to spend a little time up front simplifying
things before we get started.

And recognize that when you simplify things, you often end up with
more things.  Simplicity is not about counting.  I would rather have
more things hanging nice, straight down, not twisted together, than
just a couple of things tied in a knot.  And the beautiful thing about
making them separate is you will have a lot more ability to change it,
which is where I think the benefits lie.  So I think this is a big
deal, and I hope everybody is able to bring it into practice or use
this as a tool for convincing somebody else to do that.


[Time 1:01:12]

```
slide:

Simplicity is the ultimate
sophistication.

              Leonardo da Vinci
```

So I will leave you with this.  This is what you say when somebody
tries to sell you a sophisticated type system.

[Audience laughter]

Thank you.

[Audience applause]

[Time 1:01:22]
