# The Language of the System

* **Speaker: Rich Hickey**
* **Conference: [Clojure/Conj 2012](http://clojure-conj.org) - Nov 2012**
* **Video: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ROor6_NGIWU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ROor6_NGIWU)**


[Time 0:00:00]

```
slide:

     TBD

  Rich Hickey

```

Thanks.  This is the third Conj and the fifth year of Clojure as being
a public thing, and I could not be happier to see everybody here, and
a lot of good old friends and new friends.  And so excited about the
vibrancy in the community and obviously the creativity of everybody
involved, so congratulations on what you are accomplishing.

Now what I have been accomplishing is something I call TBD.  And I am a
little bit frustrated because my thing leaked.

[Audience laughter]

[Time 0:00:44]

```
slide:

      B
    T   D
```

You know, it is like one of those Apple, Apple keynotes.

So TBD.

[Time 0:00:49]

```
slide: 

       Better
     To      Do


+ Putting the personal in pmap
```

What does it mean: To?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

To Better Do.

And that should have a little trademark, a trademark thing on it.

[Audience laughter]

So To Better Do is a new, massively parallel, concurrent, AI driven,
to-do list application.

[Audience laughter]

And our trademark is: "Putting the personal back in pmap".

[Audience laughter]

That is all I have.  There will be a GitHub repo tomorrow with nothing
in it.  And that will probably be all that it will ever be.


[Time 0:01:37]

```
slide: 

   The Language of the
          System

       Rich Hickey
```

No, so today I would like to talk about the language of the system

[Time 0:01:45]

```
slide title: The Language Bubble

Programming Language defines world
(w/Runtime)

I/O as if someone else's problem
vs the point of your program
```

Which is a title that may not convey anything in particular, but
hopefully it will make some sense by the end.

So one of the things I think happens to us all, especially as
enthusiasts of languages, and some people use their language as like,
it is just a tool or whatever.  And then you are like, you find
something that you really like, and you become enthusiastic about it,
and you look forward to enhancing it, or making libraries for it, or
making things to interconnect with other things.  And you sort of
define your world synonymously with the world that is implied by your
programming language.

And it is impossible to avoid this, right, because the semantics of a
language, they eventually, you know, pervade your brain.  We say
things in these conferences that, you know, people from outside the
Clojure would be like, how come you can say that?  And everybody says,
oh, yeah, you know.

[Audience laughter]

It is all data.  You know, it is all the data.  It is like, oh, yeah.
I know, it is.  I hear you.  I hear you.

So a programming language sort of defines the world.  And I am going
to say language here, and I really mostly mean sort of: the language
and the corresponding runtime.  Because we have languages, a lot of
languages at the bottom.  The primitives are kind of the same.  There
is control flow and things like that.  And the runtime sort of
enhances that with a bunch of other things.

But we get involved in this programming language as a world, and then,
of course, if it is a functional language like Clojure, we get even
more involved with, wow, this functional part, this is the good world.
This is the world I really want to live in, and everything else is
sort of like the ick.  You know, so I have the good world, and we want
to minimize the ick.  And we call it I/O or something like that.

And by painting it as I/O, we almost sort of like to make it somebody
else's problem.  And like Haskell is really good at this.  You know,
it is like there a is monad and it is like: stay out!  You know, it
stays over there.  We do not really force that, but by convention and
discipline, we try to do that.

But it is important to note that, you know, that is never been
Clojure's approach to imagine that that part of your application was
not important.  I mean the whole existence of the state model is there
because, you know, actual programs need to do interactions with the
world.  They need to affect the world.  If you are not affecting the
world, I do not know why you are writing software.  So it really,
really is important.


[Time 0:04:04]

```
slide title: Language + Runtime

```

So if we look at what constitutes a language, and again sort of
language plus runtime, we get all of these facilities.  And this is in
no particular order.  But some of the things that really matter when
we start talking about the bigger picture as being either present, or
missing, or the analogies either hold or do not, are things like a
memory model.  Right?  So we have this presumption in Java.

Maybe in Clojure you are isolated from this.  But as the author of
Clojure, and as the author of the primitives that guard state and
memory transitions, the existence of a memory model in Java is super
critical.  It is a big, big promise and, you know, the fact that it is
present, it is true for all libraries written in Clojure or not that
run in the same runtime, that is based upon a resource management
structure, a garbage collector that is shared, is a gigantic suite of
facilities that is common both to your language, other things written
in the same language, and things written in other languages.

Calling conventions, who even knows what a calling convention is any
more?  C programmers remember calling conventions, because you had all
these choices, right?  And maybe even in the absence of, you know, who
is pushing what at the stack level, we still have sort of conventions
around deciding whether we pass values or references.  Even in Java,
though, that is sort of disappearing.  But that would be one aspect of
it.

Resource management, like I said, mostly in the memory space.  We know
eventually the runtimes and the languages start not helping us any more
with resources outside of memory.  There is all kinds of coordination,
right?  We have monitors.  We have volatile and things like that to
interact with the memory model to help us coordinate things.  And
again, that is sort of embodied in the primitives in Clojure.  Right?
Swap and things like that are coordination primitives that rely on
coordination primitives down underneath.

And, of course, probably the biggest things that we derive from
languages, as we touch them, that are more fun - I mean, again, there
are the primitives for control flow and whatnot - are any of the tools
for abstraction and/or type stuff.  And of course some languages
emphasize this more than others.  And Clojure probably does not
emphasize it nearly as much as some others.  So that is what we talk
about when we talk about programming language, and typically language.


[Time 0:06:22]

```
slide title: System

Stand together

Ensemble of programs (services)

No global managers as with runtimes/OS

Connected how?
```

When we talk about system, we are talking about something bigger,
bigger than a program.  In particular, I am talking about something
bigger than a program.  So the definition of system is - the roots of
it are in: stands together.  And by that I think the interpretation I
would take is that, you know, one leg of this stool is not a
particularly useful thing.  And a stool with two legs is dangerous,
but when you compose enough of the pieces, you end up with something
that performs something, a useful function.

And it is actually these systems that most of us deliver.  How many
people have a main product of their effort that is a single program
that does not interact with any other programs?  How many people think
mostly what they do is build systems or parts of systems?  Right.

So we do that, but the programming languages pretty much stop before
the system.  In other words, the system is this composition of things
whose language does not know anything about systems.  It does not say
anything about systems.  It is an ensemble of programs.  And, of
course, there are lots of ways to build systems.  And I am going to
try to narrow the scope of that because, in the old days, any two
programs could talk to each other any particular way, and that is a
system.  And it is still a system.

I think, over time, we have gotten more disciplined about how we build
systems, and now we tend to think of systems as compositions of
programs that offer services to other programs, and it is an analogy
we can draw out of what we do inside programming languages.  You can
get libraries that give you services as you consume the library.  And
then, you know, in the process space you have services that you can
call, and they have certain APIs.  And you call them, and that is what
happens.

But there are many things about a system that are very different.
And, in particular, there is no global supervision any more.  A lot of
what we get inside the language is not there.  Right?  There is no
global resource manager.  There is nothing watching everything.  There
is nothing that knows everything that is going on.  It could be more
than one process in the same box.  It could be more boxes.  There is
no, like, person in charge of the Internet making sure everything is
okay.

And the question is: how do we connect these?  How do we connect these
pieces?  And the premise of this talk is that there is a way to talk
about the way we connect these pieces that draws analogies to the way
we talk about how we connect pieces inside programming languages.  And
it both informs the design of systems and, I think, goes the other way
and systems should help inform the design of languages or the use of
languages.


[Time 0:09:01]

```
slide title: Language

+ 'Tongue' - communication
  programmer -> programmer

+ Programming Language
  programmer -> computer

+ System language
  program -> program
```

So when we say language, what do we mean?  The root, again, is tongue.
it is obviously about communication.  Right?  But everybody knows, you
know, the old saw about programming is, you know, you think it is
about talking to the machine.  And in a certain sense it is, but it is
certainly also about talking to other programmers.  Right?  So you
write a program.  The other programmer could be you, right, later.
Ten years later, you look at your code, you are like, "Whoa!".

[Audience laughter]

Who said that?  But I think it does split out a little bit, right?  So
I think, in all cases, all programming language and all the use of
language I am going to talk about is somehow about programs talking to
programs - programmers talking to programmers.  But inside a
programming language, there is also the other aspect, which is the
programmer talking to the machine.  You know, "Machine, make this
happen.  Do this stuff."

But that a very interesting, different characteristic of the
communication that occurs between programs in a system is that the
language that is used there is a language for programs to talk to
programs, almost definitely.  It is _extremely rare_ to see the
interface on a service be one that is oriented towards people, or at
least oriented towards people in human interaction, fundamentally.  It
is fundamentally oriented towards a program talking to a program, and
that is going to become really important as we move forward.


[Time 0:10:22]

```
slide title: The Stacks

  Program                 System
  -------                 -------

  Application libs        Application as services

  Runtime and core libs   ?

  Language primitives     Protocols and formats
```

So one way to think about these two things is as stacks, stacks of
specificity and hierarchy and encapsulation.  So at the bottom of a
programming language is a bunch of primitives, language primitives for
control flow, for memory acquisition, and things like that.  Then on
top of that we have core runtime facilities and core libraries and/or
libraries from third parties.  And then, finally, we build our
application libraries and our applications on top of that.  And that
is sort of all inside the program, inside the program view.

If we look at systems, I think it is a little bit harder to sort of
tease out what are the primitives of systems.  But certainly if you
start with the communication side, you end up with two very evident
pieces to the language of systems, right?

One are the protocols: UDP, TCP, HTTP, Web sockets, all these things.
Sort of the negotiated transfer primitives that we have.  And the
other are the formats: What do we say over these protocols?  And I
think that is pretty evident and straightforward, although I will talk
more about formats, but not at all any more about protocols.  The
analogy to the next level up, though, I think, is an area where we are
particularly weak in having good language for it, and it is where the
focus of this talk is going to be.

And finally, somehow, at the top, we end up with either portions of
applications or entire applications acting as services and/or
consuming each other as services.  And that is a system.  Of course,
there is a joining here because those things that are the applications
on the right were written using the stack on the left.  But the stack
on the left does not have a lot to say - usually - it does not have a
lot to say about the stack on the right.


[Time 0:12:16]

```
slide title: Say What?

+ XML, JSON, Protocol buffers, Avro, edn,
  Hessian, BERT ...

+ All data, but

+ Extensible? to new types, new versions

+ Self-describing?

+ Schemas? explicit? in/out of band?

+ Generic processors and intermediaries?
```

So the first thing we have to talk about is, "Say what?"  Again, we
talk about protocols and formats, but formats are huge.  Right?  How
many different ways do we have to talk over these wires?  What are we
sending?  XML, JSON is probably the big winner right now, protocol
buffers, and then, of course quite common in this room would be EDN
and Clojure data.  But there is also Avro and Hessian and BERT.  How
many know what all of these things are?  Not too many.  How many know,
of those people, could make a matrix as to why one is better or
different than another?

And yet, you know, this is actually pretty important, right?  This is
what we are going to be saying from one process to another.  It is a
huge thing.  And it is full of decision points.

I think one of the things that is really cool about it is: all of
these things are representations of data.  What is not up here?  What
key Java technology for things talking to other things is not here?

[Audience member: RPC]

Well, that is not really what --

[Audience member: Serialization.]

Yeah, with RMI, right?  RMI, yeah, a big winner.  How about DCOM?
CORBA?  Anybody?  Okay.  Those are not even on this list, right?  They
all lost.  They all lost for really good reasons.  So we are not even
going to talk about that.  We have already reached the point where
every single one of these choices is a data format.

So already we have got this great premise.  The way services are going
to talk to each other is by conveying data, not through some
hyper-linguistic or extended linguistic thing where there are all
these extended verbs, and there is a notion of a program object being
on a different machine, and things like that.  We are just going to
talk with data.

So we have to talk.  We have to split out: what about the data is good
or bad?  What are the decision points?  One is extensibility, right?
Given this format, if I have a new thing to say to you tomorrow, is
there a way for me to encode that?  If there is not, it is not
extensible.  Which of these things on the list is not extensible?
JSON!  There you go.  That is really not good.  And it leads to a
couple problems we will get to later.

And there are two notions of extensibility.  One is to new types.  The
other is to new versions.  There is a sense in which, for instance,
protocol buffers are really mostly about being extensible to new
versions.  You can make things go to new types, but an existing
consumer cannot be really aware of those.  But they can be tolerant of
new versions.

Self-describing: which of these things is self-describing?  XML, kind
of sort of.  What else?

[Audience member: Protocol buffers]

Not protocol buffers.

[Audience member: Avro.]

Avro, EDN, Hessian, and BERT, and Erlang's Transfer, which is what
BERT is a flavor of.

What does that mean: to be self-describing?  It means that if I have a
decoder that understands the rules of the format, I can read anything
that you send, and I do not need to know anything else out of band.  I
do not have to get a description any other way.  That is not true of
protocol buffers, right?  If somebody starts streaming you protocol
buffer stuff, it is like gobbledygook if you have never seen the
schema, and where is the schema in the protocol buffer stream?  It is
_not_ in the stream.  It must be transmitted out of band.

[Time 0:15:49]

So we get to this other part, which is schemas: in or out of band?  Of
the ones that are self-describing, one of them has schemas.  Which is
that?

[Audience member: XML (indiscernible).]

Well, that is optional though.  But one has one that is required for
reading them.

[Audience member: Protocol buffers.]

[Audience member: Avro.]

No, protocol buffers are already out.  Avro.  Avro has a prelude
schema thing.  So then you have this question.  Are the schemes in or
out of band?  Avro has schemas.  Protocol buffer has schemas.  Avro's
are in band.  Protocol buffers are out of band.  But both of those
have more requirements on the schema interpretation than something
like EDN or XML.

Of course, XML, you can definitely read it.  You may not understand it,
but you can read it without anything.  If you have schemas, they are
sort of optional.

Why does it matter whether or not schemas are in or out of band?  I
mean, it is on the slide.

If you have schemas, what can't you have?  If you have out of band
schemas, what can't you have?  You cannot have these things: generic
processors and intermediaries.  It is really interesting that Google
came up with protocol buffers.

Imagine if the Internet was built with protocol buffers.  How good
would Google's search be?  It would be bad, right, because they are in
the intermediary business.  They are taking advantage of the fact that
any HTML processor can read any HTML.  Right?  If everything was a
negotiated contract, it just simply would not work, so you really have
to understand.  It is not to say that protocol buffers are bad.  I am
not saying that.  But what I am saying is that there is a spectrum of
choice and tradeoffs that is _really_ important here.

It is as important as choosing a language when you pick your
programming language.  But picking any programming language now leaves
you with this decision when you move up to the system level.  Of
course, a lot of times this is not your choice.  Right?  You are
consuming a service that somebody else has made a choice.  And it
highlights sort of the next problem in this space, which is that there
is nobody in charge.

When you use a programming language, the programming language kind of
sort of says, "Well, we are all going to pass arguments like this, and
we are going to define our types like that, and everything else."  And
with no one in charge, systems struggle against this set of
independent decisions, which may or may not compose.  And the formats
problem is the first place this comes up.  So this schema is out of
band is really tricky.

[Time 0:18:13]

And that is one of the things where people are like, oh, JSON.  Well,
I could put dates in JSON.  Right?  How do you put dates in JSON?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

As strings.  And how do you know they are there?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

Out of band.  You go back to the napkin, right?  It is like if the key
has the word date in it, then the string is a date.  There we go!  And
so there is another aspect of that, which is: that is not merely out
of band.  Right?  If you get a protocol buffer schema out of band, it
is not a napkin, right?  It is very straightforward.

JSON is very, very -- the people's _use_ of JSON is extremely context
dependent, and a lot of times that context is not captured anywhere
except on a napkin.  It is like, okay, well, we have all agreed to
send this and, like, you know this is coming.  And, therefore, you are
going to go to the last edited field, and you happen to know that last
edited is a string that has a date in it.  So that context sensitivity
is really bad.


[Time 0:19:12]

```
slide title:  Values

+ Most often ephemeral, on wire

+ Need names when not

  + passing large values,

  + memory

+ How to distinguish value from reference?

  + permalinks etc
```

So obviously in this room we do not have to talk about the value of
values.  We like values.  And I think the only thing to do here is to
sort of, again, think about the differences between programming
languages and systems with values.  So we definitely have values in
systems at least at one level: on the wire, right?  We just looked at
all the popular formats for transmitting stuff.

They are all data formats.  They are all values.  We are not really
passing a reference to a guy that you are going to then call back on
his RMI interface to go get more stuff and have this big, chattery
communication with objects.  We just convey the data that we care
about, so that is fine.

Those are ephemeral, and they are usually nameless.  And, in
programming languages, values are often usually nameless.  Right?  We
have the same notion.  We can pass values.  We get our value as a
return from a function.  We just have it.  We start processing it.

Java is not a particularly strong language for values because
everything, almost, is a reference type.  But in languages that really
have them as distinct things, a lot of times values are completely
anonymous.  You have an array of structs.  None of the structs have
names.

If, however, you want to have a value in a system that is not
ephemeral, that means that either - maybe it is large.  It is so
large, I do not want to put it on the wire and send it to 100 people.
I want to put it somewhere and let the people know where it is.  Or I
want to have memory in a system.  I want to remember a value.

In both those cases, you end up incurring a new thing, which is that
your values need to have names.  And that is a definite change versus
your programming language.  It is one that really matters because,
until we start becoming more cognizant of when we are manipulating
values and that this is a name that names a value, we are going to
keep making these icky, messed up systems that do not distinguish
references from values.

For instance, how do you know when a link is a permalink?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

You do not know the link is a permalink because, on the Web page where
you got it, it said: "this is a permalink."

[Audience laughter]

And so, when designing a system, you need to be more considerate of
this and call it out.


[Time 0:21:30]

```
slide title: Names

+ Global scope

+ Namespaces critical

+ Very few used for 'code' or verbs

+ Services, machines, storage locations etc
```

So that brings us back to names.  And again, here, we sort of had this
difference, right?  Inside a program, we have all these great scopes.
I am in a local scope.  I have a let.  Just nobody knows about this.
Now I am in a function.  I am also sort of cool.  And this function is
in name space; that is also sort of great.  And then the name space is
on GitHub, and then what happens?

Then we are all fighting for names on cool names on GitHub.  We are
going to use up all the characters and all the stars and robots and,
you know, names of food.

And so it is really critical, once you lift up a system, right, and
nobody is in charge any more.  What is true of most system names?
They are global.  I mean they are potentially global.  And you really
need to think about that.  You really need to be considerate of the
fact that as you start building systems, as your names start escaping
out of your processes, that they are global names, right?  And the
really tedious things like Java's, you know, com.whatever.whatever,
that stuff matters.  Because what is com.whatever?  Where did that
come from?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

Somebody who is in charge, right?  There is a somebody in charge
there.  In the absence of that, it is a free for all.  And so those
DNS names and whatnot become critical.  And using fully qualified
namespace names that are truly global names is an important discipline
for doing systems.

But it is also interesting to think about how different the names are.
What are the things that - what are most of your names in a program,
especially in a Clojure program, most of your names; 99% of your names
are what?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

They are one of two things, right?  they are either locals or what?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

The names of functions.  And we have a huge, huge number of names
dedicated to functions in our programs.  That is where most of our
names go.  They are mostly verbs.

What happens in systems?  Who likes to work with a system that has a
ton of verbs?

That is really interesting.  Right?  Why is that?  There is all of
these inversions as we get to systems, aren't there?  We have got lots
of names of verbs, hardly any.  We have this global control.  We do
not have global control.  And we are going to have a lot of names in
systems, but they are going to be used for other things, probably not
verbs: machines and things like that, storage locations.  And then
these values, right, are going to need names, which is another
critical thing.


[Time 0:24:04]

```
slide title: Read Between the
                   Lines

+ Where do the semantics of a system live?

      +---+   +---+         +---+
      | 7 |   | 5 |         | 3 |
      +---+   +---+         +---+
        | \    |             | |
        |  ----|------      /  |
         \    /       \    /   |
          V  V         V  V    |
         +----+       +---+    |
         | 11 |       | 8 |    |
         +----+       +---+    |
          |  | \     /         |
          |  |  ----|------    |
         /    \    /       \   |
        V      V  V         V  V
      +---+   +---+        +----+
      | 2 |   | 9 |        | 10 |
      +---+   +---+        +----+
```

So systems look like this.  Every process has a number.  No, obviously
they do not.  This is - I am being lazy on Google images.  That has
circles and lines.  It is faster than me trying to learn how to do
that in Keynote.

Does anyone know how to make a line connect to a thing and stick?

[Audience laughter]

Like, I moved the thing, and the line is just sitting there.  Can you
make them connect?

[Audience member: Omnigraffle]

No, I can do it there, but then it is like two things.  And then the
Internet has this picture.  So if you ignore the numbers, the numbers
are not important.  The numbers are not important.

But a lot of systems have this shape.  It is fundamentally
hierarchical.  It is not like everybody is calling everyone and it is
this big, big nightmare, right?  It is generally some things call
other things call other things, come back, come back.  And there is
some sharing across.  There may be a couple of lines across at a
level, and there may be one guy at the top.  You know, from your
perspective that is you.  Ooh, I get to consume all this stuff.  And
maybe I do not serve anybody else.  It depends on how I am situated.

But the critical thing here is that: while each of these things, in
their bubble, might make a ton of sense, maybe they are written in
Haskell and, like, it is proven that they are correct or something
awesome, right?  As soon as you start drawing lines between them, what
happens?  All sorts of new implications about what things mean have
_arisen_, have _emerged_, from the connections of these things.  And
it is different in some way from consuming libraries.

You might look at this and say, well, this is not different from
libraries.  Where I have libraries it is the same thing.  They wrote
the library, and they did whatever.  They are now consuming it.

But what do the library and you share?  A _ton of stuff_.  All that
runtime stuff.  You share all kinds of presumptions about memory,
coordination, locking, threads, garbage collection, the whole nine
yards.  What do you share between these things?  Some wires, routers,
and things like that.

So the question is: where does the semantics of the system live?  What
does this mean?  How can we define the pieces such that we can sort of
get a grip on what this is?  So usually it is hierarchical, but that
is not enough to really understand it.


[Time 0:26:14]

```
slide title: The Revenge of
                Objects?

        DANGER [in bright red oval]

+ 'Service= is an arbitrary notion

+ Triggering effects across a graph of stateful
  objects [strikethrough that word] services
```

And this is where I think we really run into trouble.  This is where
the problem is.  Right?  What does that look like?

[goes back to previous slide "Read Between the Lines"]

It looks like object-oriented programming.  Right?  All these objects,
they are connected, and they send stuff to each other and whatever.
And it is possible, right?

[goes back to slide "The Revenge of Objects?]

And it is possible that this system, built out of all these processes,
is exactly like objects at scale.  Right?  Every process is like an
object, and it is stateful, and it sends things over to other guys,
and then they change, and the whole thing is really exciting.

[Audience laughter]	

Because service is an arbitrary notion.  What does it mean to be a
service?  You know, you send me stuff, and I do stuff.  I mean, one
thing that is sort of telling is, there aren't a lot of verbs, which
is kind of good.  But, you know, all the services are still nouns.
The fact that they do not have a lot of operations is helpful about
saying, well, maybe they are not like objects.  But there is nothing
stopping them from being objects.

That is crossed out, right?  Yeah, so in what way is this not object
orientation?  How do we keep it from being object orientation in the
large?  Because if we have, you know, spent all this time doing
functional programming in the small only to build object-oriented
programming in the large, then our system in the large is still going
to have the negative attributes of object orientation.


[Time 0:27:46]

```
slide title: Welcome to the
                Machine

   [ Figure of a multi-part machine that
     looks like it might be arranged in an
     assembly line fashion. ]

+ Machines apply force to accomplish work

+ That's what systems do!
```

So I think one way to think about this is to think about machines and
production lines and things like that.  What we are trying to do here
in the next few slides is to try to think about a way ...  Obviously
we are saying change happens, right?  We know that this is a dynamic
system that is producing stuff.  It is affecting the world.  That is
the _point_ of it, so we are not going to try to _deny_ that.

But what is a way to organize it such that we do not end up with
object mess?  And one way is to think about it like this production
line thing.  So what does a machine do?  A machine applies forces to
accomplish work.  Now think about like a car factory.  What happens in
a car factory?  Well, people go in there every day, and they work real
hard, and they mutate the state of the car factory, and then they go
home.  Right?

[Audience laughter]

That is like objects.  It is like an object-oriented program, right?
Maybe, you know, some stuff - No! it is not like that.  Right?  There
is like one end of the factory, and something comes in there.  What?
Raw materials, parts, you know, iron, and tires, and stuff.  Right?

And then something comes out the other end.  What?  Hopefully cars.
Right?  And so this notion of flow, I think, is the key to keeping
systems sorted.


[Time 0:29:11]

```
slide title: Avoiding Objects

+ Transform (values)

+ Move (values)

+ Route (values)

+ Record/remember (values)

+ Keep separate

+ _flow_ vs places
```

So there are a bunch of characteristics that you can combine that will
- even though that technically a certain percentage of them are not
functional - accomplish something in a way that is not place oriented,
right.  If you have heard me talk negatively about place orientation.
That, you know, we all went into the factory and had a good time and
went home, and the factory is now better - this place orientation.

And this kind of flow orientation cures that.  So what are the things
that we have in flow?  We have transformation.  So one of the things
we are going to be doing is transforming values.  I am going to take,
you know, the lugs and the whatever things go, the tire.  I am going
to screw them together, and now I will have a wheel instead of the
parts of a wheel.

We are going to move things from one place to another.  We are going
to route them.  Maybe it needs to go here or there.  We are going to
have decisions about that.

We may remember things.  And again, the word "remember" is a term that
is not incompatible with functional programming in a way that update
is.  And I think the critical thing to sort of making systems out of
these parts is that you, as much as possible, keep them separate.  In
other words, when you make a transforming, moving, routing,
remembering thing, it is really going to be hard to keep that from
being something you cannot take apart and reason about or combine with
other things.  So even though each of these steps, I think, has a
sound use, if you were to put them all together in one thing, it would
not be sound any more.  So you want to keep transforming separate from
moving, and moving separate from routing, and routing separate from
remembering, things like that.

And this is the difference between flow and places.  But move and
route and remember are not strictly functional.  That is okay.  We
know we need to affect the world.


[Time 0:31:08]

```
slide title: Transform

     [Greek letter lambda]

+ Values on I/O straightforward

+ But sometimes work from/to storage
```

So, transformation, this is the thing that is easiest, right?  We know
transformation is just functions.  It is basically straightforward.
The only thing here is that generally there might be some input to the
function, which is now not just sort of a local input from a call from
a programming language, but it is coming over a wire, and there is
output over the wire.

The thing that gets a little bit trickier sometimes with functions at
the system level is that sometimes you need to convey information out
of, you know, off the wire.  I need to put it, you know, in a database
so that you can see it later, and I am not going to actually put some
huge thing over the wire to you in every message.  And, in that case,
you now have this sort of stranger view where I need to run this
function, and what I have is not the value but what?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

The name of the value.  And I am going to try to distinguish the name
of the value from a reference because they are actually different.  So
sometimes you work to and from storage.  Otherwise, though, it is
still functions.  This is not hard.


[Time 0:32:10]

```
slide title: I'm a Mover

+ Queues rule

  decouple producer and consumer

  identity and availability

+ Move/route _values_

  Pub/sub etc

[ Figure of a line of identical objects on a conveyor belt. ]
```

Now we get to moving things around.  I think it is one of the things
in Clojure maybe I did not make clear enough, because I did not need
to wrap them, is that the queues in java.util.concurrent are awesome.
If you are not using them as part of your system designs internally,
you are missing out.  And, in the large, queues also rule because they
have this really great characteristic: hey are completely
decoupling.

Messages: What happens with the message?  A says something to B.  When
A says something to B, what does A need to know?  B.  That is a
problem.  If A puts something on a queue, who gets it?  Don't know.
So that decoupling is really good, both in the identity of the
consumer, also in the availability.

If I put something in a queue and the person who is supposed to
consume it is not running, do I care?  Not usually.  There may be
backflow and some other kind of considerations, but the availability
of the consumer is also something that you do not care about, right?
Again, a directly connected message: A said something to B.  If B is
not around, that is now a problem for A.  If A puts something on a
queue, presumably if you can make the queue more available than B, you
get this independence, both in the identity of the consumer and the
availability of the consumer, which is extremely strong.

The other great thing about conveyor belts and queues is that what do
they do?  What is their job?  Move stuff.  What is their other job?
There is no other job.  That is all they do, right?  So it has that
characteristic we had from before.

I mean, when you get to pub/sub, you end up with routing and moving,
and they are both on this slide, but that is really strong.  Queues
are extremely important.  Queues are decidedly different from messages
for those reasons.  Messages, they need an available consumer, and you
need to know who you are talking to.  It is architecturally
_completely_ different.


[Time 0:34:17]

```
slide title: Memory     [ figure of human brain ]

+ Epochal time model still works

+ References (identities) to values

+ Coordination a la carte
```

All right, now there is memory.  This is the part that is really
tricky, because you do not have a ton of great options for memory that
are not place oriented.  There is a new thing that is kind of good for
this.

[Audience laughter]	

But you do not need to even use that.  The key point I want to make
here is that the epochal time model, the one that is behind Clojure,
it works in systems.  It works at the system level.  I am going to
show you the picture again later.  But the basic idea is what?  We
have reference types, right?  And we have values.  And the reference
types only ever contain values.  They only ever just point to values,
and they have semantics about how they transition from one value to
the other.

There is nothing about what I just said that is about Clojure, that is
about memory, that is about locking.  There is a little bit that is
probably about CAS, but not CAS on the chip.  It is a very, very
general notion, and Datomic implements that notion in the large, but
you can also implement it yourself.  And you are going to need to
combine a couple things.  You are going to need to combine naming
values with some sort of reference and some sort of a la carte
coordination.

[Time 0:35:29]

```
slide title: Epochal Time Model

[TBD: Create ASCII art version, or just keep the link below.]
```
![00.35.29 Epochal Time Model](LanguageSystem/00.35.29.jpg)

So this is my old slide of the epochal time model.  Clojure implements
this.  We know atoms are this.  Refs are this.  Agents are this.  And
we can do this ourselves.  We are going to say we have a reference.
It takes on different states over time.  Each of the states is a
value.  You are able to obtain the value out of the reference as an
independent thing.  And we just said before about values in systems
that you are going to need to get a hold on, are going to need to have
what?  Names.  They are going to need to have names.  That is what is
different.  And then we can transition from values to values.


[Time 0:36:06]

```
slide title: Datomic on Riak
               + ZooKeeper

[TBD: Create ASCII art version, or just keep the link below.]
```
![00.36.06 Datomic on Riak](LanguageSystem/00.36.06.jpg)

So we can see this in action in the way Datomic uses ZooKeeper and
things like Riak or S3.  So Riak and S3 do not have the semantics
required to do the state succession.  They do not have what you need
to do that.  You need something along the lines of either CAS or
versioned updates or something like that.

But ZooKeeper, they have that.  They have versioned updates.  So you
can combine them, and you can implement something like refs in
ZooKeeper that point to values that you store in something like Riak
or S3 or a store that does not otherwise have the consistency or the
ordered transitional semantics.

And you can pull tools out like Avout right now and do this for
yourselves.

[ Avout: https://github.com/liebke/avout ]

So the important thing to note is that the Clojure state model is
available at the systems level.  You do it this way, and the only
thing you have to do is put names on your values.  What is a good name
for a value?

[Audience member: UUID.]

UUID.  Is that Stu?

[Audience member: No.]

No.  That is good.  Stu is always my spoiler.  Yeah, UUID.  What is
not a good name?  Fred.  I got this from wherever, or anything else.
Because what starts to happen when you have those kinds of names?
People start to care about them.  What should you care about, about a
value name?  Nothing at all.

Also, because a lot of the places where you are going to be putting
values, you really want to be conflict free.  You do not want to have
to coordinate on values.  You do not have to - oh, is this Fred 27 or
Fred 217, or whatever?  You just do not want to be there.  So UUIDs
are a good thing to use to name values.  You do not care because that
is not the identity.  What is the identity?  The one over here, which
you are going to have very few of.

For instance, in Datomic, you could have hundreds of millions of items
in Datomic.  Do you know how many refs you are going to have in
ZooKeeper for a database?  Three.  You know it now, right?  You have
built systems in Clojure.  How many refs do you end up having?  How
man atoms?  A tiny, tiny amount.  Probably the best thing about
Clojure is showing people how little of that you actually need.  It is
the same thing here.

But the strong names, right, the globally qualified name space names
will be the identity names.  That is really important that they be
like that.  The value names, you want to be conflict free, tear off
names that anyone can create without coordination, and that is what a
UUID is about.


[Time 0:38:49]

```
slide title: Failure

+ Partial

+ Independent

+ Timeouts

+ Retries, idempotency

+ http://www.erlang.org/download/armstrong_thesis_2003.pdf
```

All right, of course this is my favorite topic: errors and error
messages and whatever.

[Audience laughter]

So there is this really important paper at the bottom here.  And if
you read this paper over and over again, which I recommend, you are
going to see a couple of facts about systems.  And it is another way
in which systems are really different from programs.

In a program, are you really afraid that some object you are going to
call is not going to be there?  No.  The whole program tends to, like,
be around, or not, all together.  It succeeds or fails all together.

We get all confused because we live in this bubble.  It is like, well,
errors are like when I made a mistake.  That is not right.  That is
just like programmer convenience thinking.

In the real world, failures are all the time.  The things that you
depend on are possibly not there all the time.  A large system is in a
state of partial failure almost continuously, right?  The math is
against you for having all of your 10,000 machines always work all the
time.

So parts of your system, right, when you look at the whole thing, will
not be working.  It also means that those things that are not working
will not be available.  Those failures are going to be uncorrelated.
they are going to be completely independent.  You still are fine, but
somehow the thing you are talking to has become unresponsive or
unreachable or whatever.

And it starts to give you a whole new way of thinking about dealing
with failure.  Because the things you are talking to are unreliable,
you have to use timeouts.  You have to retry.  If you are going to
retry, well, you have this open question.  I mean, I might not have
heard back from you, but you might have heard my original request and
done it.  So I need to know that my future requests are idempotent.
Who is worried about that when you are working on stuff in memory
inside your program?  You do not worry about these things at all.

But the thing is, as soon as your program becomes part of a system,
these error modes are going to go right through your program.  You are
not going to be able to deny them, and you are not going to be able to
convert them into something else.  You cannot fix them.  They go right
through you.

And as soon as they go right through you, you realize that distributed
error modes are the only error modes.  Everything else is just like
programmer convenience error handling stuff, but it is not really what
the system's error modes are about.  So I definitely recommend that
you read the paper because you cannot think about it often enough, and
it really is difficult to internalize.  And you will still write
systems where you presume the best, and then you are like, ah, the
best thing is not going to happen sometimes.


[Time 0:41:45]

```
slide title: Systems are Dynamic

+ Membership

+ Capacity

+ Capability

+ Discoverability, scalability, elasticity etc
```

So the other things about systems is that they are dynamic, and they
are dynamic in a whole bunch of different ways, right?  They are
dynamic in membership where we just said some machines come and go.
Sometimes they will come and go on purpose, not because they failed,
but because somebody started some more machines.  They will come and
go for capacity, right, as people are trying to scale.

They will also come and go for capability.  The system will be
running, and all of a sudden somebody wants to do something new, and
they will start up new stuff.  And systems that can become dynamically
capable of doing new things are really strong systems.  It is the kind
of system that you want to pursue.

And so all new kinds of terminology is going to come to bear at the
system level that you do not have inside.  You cannot scale one box.
But you can scale a system.

There are not usually the same notions of discovery, right?  Somewhat,
you know, maybe if you are talking about injection and things like
that.  But the true notion of discovery is a distributed thing.
Elasticity is the same kind of thing.  So we know that systems are
dynamic, and that has implications for the programming languages.


[Time 0:42:46]

```
slide title: Holistic Approach

+ e.g. Erlang

+ fundamental language units are services

+ bespoke communication

+ specified model (actors)
```

So there is a holistic approach to this, and there is a great example
of the holistic approach to this, which is Erlang.  Erlang _is_ a
language of the system.  It takes the approach of saying: I am only
going to be building systems.  I know that up front, and I want these
semantics inside the processes.  I do not want different sets of
semantics.  I do not want my bubble semantics and my system semantics.
I do not want my bubble interfaces and my system interfaces.

Just so you are not worried, this is not where I say we should all
switch to Erlang.

[Audience laughter]	

I just saw everybody is like, "Oh, my god!  Did he change his mind
already?"

[Audience laughter]

"It has only been a couple years."

No, so there is nothing wrong with a holistic approach, right?  In
Erlang, the fundamental units of programs are services.  They call
them processes, but they are little services.  They have
communications capabilities.  But they follow all the things that we
talked about before.  In particular, it is not like RMI.  Those little
services are not like objects.  They send what?

[Audience members: Messages.]

Messages, which are data.  Right.  They are data.  It is, though,
custom communication that they use, and there is a very specific model
baked into the language that basically said we are going to do actors.
We are going to do asynchronous, send only, receive asynchronously, no
synchronous communication.  RPC you have to build out of pieces and
things like that.  So there is a very, very specific model here, which
I think is extremely well suited to making communications programs.

But what is the tradeoff with the holistic approach?  Is Erlang a
great number crunching language?  No.  Is it really expressive in
certain kinds of domains?  No.  Definitely, it is good at some things
and less good at other things.  It does not have a rich type system.
It does not have a rich abstraction model or other things.  So the
tradeoff of a holistic approach is just sort of you put all your eggs
in one basket.

I think the fact of it is: you are never going to be able to dictate
to everybody to use Erlang or use any one thing.  You cannot say: we
are all going to do our programming in this one language.  That is the
whole "there is a king of the world" thing.  Inside Ericsson, maybe
they can do that and say everybody is going to do Erlang.  But in the
world on the whole, I do not think you can sell holistic approaches
because you cannot convince everybody to use the same language, even
if it is better.


[Time 0:45:19]

```
slide title: Heterogeneous
               Approach

+ Cross-language/runtime/platform

+ The language of the system:

  + Protocols (TCP, UDP, HTTP etc)

  + Formats (XML, JSON, edn etc)

  + Simple Services
```

So that leaves us with the heterogeneous approach.  We have to have
some sort of cross-language notion of how to talk about things, how to
express the semantics of systems, and what the language of systems are
that crosses languages, and runtimes, and platforms, and things like
that.  And, as I said at the beginning, we know parts of that language
are protocols and formats.


[Time 0:45:43]

```
slide title: The Stacks

  Program                 System
  -------                 -------

  Application libs        Application as services

  Runtime and core libs   _Simple_ Services [highlighted for emphasis]

  Language primitives     Protocols and formats

```

And I think the third part, the thing that fills in this box, are
things that I will call "simple services".  So a simple service is a
service.  It is its own process, right?  It does communication using
data.  It should have a very small surface area in terms of the API,
right?  If the API is mostly data, it should have an extremely small
number of verbs associated with it.  And it should do mostly one
thing.  And you will see that a lot of the facilities of programming
languages and runtimes are now available as services.


[Time 0:46:17]

```
slide title: _Simple_ System Services

+ Communication (message queues)

+ Coordination (ZooKeeper)

+ Control flow (AWS Simple Workflow, Storm)

+ Memory (memcache, redis etc)

+ Storage (S3, K/V stores et al)

+ More, and smaller - the best do the least
```

So we have queues, right?  We have java.util.concurrent queue and then
how many message queues are out there?  Tons, tons, all with different
characteristics, and you will make different choices.  But there are
plenty of message queues that are dedicated to that.

Now, unfortunately, this says simple and, you know, if I knew how to
use Keynote, that would be blinking and on fire.  I saw fire was good.

It is super important, and I think one of the challenges for this
approach is, invariably, people would like their service to do some
more.  And making it do a little more also breaks the simple part.  So
for instance, queues usually have very, very icky durability things,
like, once they start to get into that space.  And all of a sudden,
wow, this is not simple any more.

Coordination, things like ZooKeeper are extremely interesting.  If you
have not used it or something like it, it is very cool to think about
all I have over here is just coordination.  And if you can constrain
yourself to that, of course, again, ZooKeeper is durable, and you
could try to treat it like a database, and now you are trying to make
it do more stuff and not use it simply, because it does do more.  But
if you treat it simply, it is a fantastic, little utility just to do
that part of the Clojure state model or whatever - epochal state
model.

Control flow, you have things like Amazon Simple Workflow, right, and
Storm.  We just saw an example of Storm before.  Look at Storm.  What
is it?  It is what I have been talking about.  It is this flow model.
Although, again, it sort of says this is the recipe that crosses all
the pieces, as opposed to saying we are going to compose queues plus
arbitrary consumers of queues and other queues.  It sort of says: I
want to wrap around your whole thing, and I want you to play this
coordinated game.  So again, it is less simple than it could be.  But
as an architectural strategy, it is an example of what I am talking
about.  It is flow oriented.

We are used to memory services, right?  Memcache is a beautiful thing.
People are like, oh, memcache, blah, blah, blah.  Most of the problems
with memcache is people are using it to solve horrible problems with
using place-oriented databases.  That is a sucky problem.  That is not
a suckiness of memcache.  Memcache is brilliantly simple and it does
exactly one thing.  You know, of course, they keep trying to make it
do a little bit more, but it does the one thing it does really well,
so that is shared memory.

Redis is another popular example.  Again, hopefully they will keep it
simple.  And, to the extent they do, it is the kind of thing you can
compose together.

And, of course, storage has exploded.  S3 is global shared memory.  It
is an awesome thing, except what?  Shared memory is dangerous, right?
But we know how to make shared memory safe.  Clojure has shared
memory.  It uses it.  In fact, it is quite fundamental to Clojure that
you have shared memory, and shared memory is important.  You just have
to be careful in using it.

If you combine the reference to immutable objects, you can use S3 just
as safely.  You can use a key value store just as safely, exactly the
same way.  The only trick there is the transitions of the refs needs
help from things like ZooKeeper.  But moving up the stack, like
DynamoDB, has that semantic built into it.  A lot of the memory caches
like Infinispan have it built in, so you can get it.  You can get both
together like we have in-memory, in systems.  So you want, I think we
want more of these, and we want them to be smaller still and to do as
little as possible.


[Time 0:49:50]

```
slide title: Whither the Interface?

+ What abstracts away service details?

  not much (IDL, WSDL etc not common)

+ de facto standards get copied

  S3, memcache

+ Can do this in programming-language libs

  e.g. jclouds
```

So I think one of the problems we have here is: there is something
that we really like inside our programming languages, an important
tool, which is the interface or the protocol.  It is the thing that
abstracts away from us the details of what we are talking to.  Where
is the interface for S3?

Right, in a different audience, there would be people gripping the
arms of the chairs.  Like, no, we have solved this, right?  We use
WSDL, and then they use a BPL thing, and I draw these pictures, and I
have systems.  We are just naive in here because we like to build
things out of smaller parts, and we should be up there.

No, I mean there are things like that, but they do not get used.
Amazon did not use WSDL.  Maybe they tried?  Did they try early on?
Does anybody remember?  Were there any schemas ever?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

There used to be, right?  Now it is just like, "Read the docs.  Try
it!"  And when you get it right, you will not get a 404.

[Audience laughter]

So you just do not see it.  You just do not see it any more.  And so
what you have seen now instead is S3 is so dominant that when Open
Stack wants to have the same kind of service, they do not have any
abstraction to tap into to say, "We also implement that abstraction."
What do they have to do?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

They have to directly imitate the protocol of S3.  This is not a great
place to be.  The same thing has happened with memcache.  People are
like, well, memcache is cool.  People are like, well, I have this
other cool, distributed, redundant memory cache.  It is like, well, I
use memcache.

But, I mean, this has more, better.  But what do they have to do?
Mimic memcache on the wire.  This is really a bad thing.  And I do not
know what the answer is because I do not think WSDL and things like it
are the answer either.  But it leaves us in a difficult place.

This is an area that we can repair inside the programming language.
There are all kinds of variants of: put stuff out of place, like S3.
Some of them mimic S3 and some of them do not.  But something like
jclouds can go and isolate you from that.  So it is superimposing
abstraction.

Now there are two ways to think about doing this.  That
superimposition of abstraction happens where?  Is it a service?  Who
knows what jclouds is?  All right, a fair amount.  So jclouds is a
library.  It is a Java enclosure library that has an encapsulation
both over sort of the EC2 elements of cloud services and of the
storage.  And we just think about the storage right now.  There is
this thing called blob store, and it abstracts away the details of
connecting to S3, or connecting to Open Stack's stack, or to whatever
VMware sells, or whatever another vendor has.  And so they have given
you an abstraction inside the language.

If we do not want to do this inside, what do we end up with?  What is
the system version of this?  Proxy.  And that you tend not to see.
Why?  It adds a hop, right?  It adds a hop, and it is like that.  But
it is still tricky.  We do not have interfaces, and I think we are
suffering.


[Time 0:53:12]

```
slide title: Programs -> Systems

+ Need more values if we want FP benefits

+ Flow orientation and fine granularity

  encourage reuse and composition

+ Interfaces/abstraction

  lives where?

  w/o, difficult to parameterize service with
  services
```

So what can programs tell systems?  What can systems, what can our
systems learn from our programming?  One is, we need more values.
Values need to be first class.  We need to name them.  We need to
start using the epochal time model in our systems designs.  You can do
it yourself today.  I just showed you three ways to do it.

You just have to choose to do it.  You have to take this flow
orientation.  This is something you may or may not be using.  People
talk to me a lot in Clojure.  They are like, I love Clojure.  I have
the functional part.  I think I am getting a grip on it.  And every
time I try to get the state, even if I use the state stuff from
Clojure, I still end up sort of struggling with a model for the whole
thing.

The model is this flow model.  Just flow values around.  Use queues
inside your application.  it is not like this trivializes everything
you need to do, but you can do a lot by just emulating this inside.
And, of course, if that is your best practice inside, it is nice to
convey it out.

This is the way you are going to get more reusable things and things
that are easier to compose.  I do think we are struggling with any
kind of abstraction.  We know it is good, but we do not know how to do
it at the system level.

And I think the biggest thing we suffer from here is, A, well, yeah,
how does somebody else provide a service like S3 and let you try to
use it?  But the B side of it is, what if you are trying to be a
service and you are trying not to build in durability into yourself?
You would like to be playing this game well and saying I am
componentized.

Well, in a programming language, we totally know how to do this.  You
say: I will work with anything that implements this interface or
anything that implements this protocol.  We now have a way to say
that.  And the person who wants to compose you with something else has
this recipe for doing it.

Now what is the systems way to do that?  What is the systems way for
saying I am parameterizable in my storage?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

It is really difficult.  A URI is not enough, right?  I mean, you need
to know what method to talk over.  So what ends up happening right now
is your service needs to embed something like jclouds or an
implementation of an abstracting thing, and you need to individually
support what your users are going to need, or provide an extensible
mechanism, but you are doing it inside yourself.  As opposed to sort
of saying, at the system level, I have a way to say this is an
interface that I use so that you can plug in the kind of storage you
want with me.  So we are suffering there.

[Time 0:55:37]

What do systems tell programs?  I do not think - you know, there is a
great papers, great old papers that say, "Do not try to make your
distributed system like your programming language."  And they are
totally right, especially at the time they wrote it, which is when
objects were hot and people were trying to do CORBA and things like
that.  Terrible, terrible idea.

But we should also be able to pull - so, but some things are
important, like functional programming is important.  I think it is
not done a lot in systems.  What can systems tell programs?  Well, the
one thing is this machine-like thing, right?  Maybe it is easier to
see when you have wires.  Right?  It is quite obvious the only thing I
can send over the wire is a value in XML, so I have chosen to use
that.

But now, like, well, in this audience I do not have to say this, but
in Java, people have a real question, right?  They do not tend to send
data structures around in their interfaces the way we do.  And they
have this real choice.  I could send a data structure or an object
that has all these verbs and knows how to do stuff and changes and
dances, and I might as well send that.  It is only one argument.  It
is a lot easier, and I do not have to type.  In fact, IntelliJ will
just type it for me.

[Audience laughter]

So I think, in Clojure, we are kind of spoiled because we do this all
the time.  But it is something that if you are trying to talk to
somebody, you are trying to talk to somebody else who is building a
system about maybe they should bring this architecture inside their
program, you have to make the rationale from the systems level.  This
makes sense in systems, and you explain to me why it does not inside
the program, because I do not understand why it would not.

The other thing is this programmatic, program-to-program interfaces
rule.  Right?  Where do we suffer when we do not do that?  When we only
define a human interface or we define a human interface first, where
do we suffer?  Every single time we do it, every single, single time.

Anybody ever try to write a program that manipulates any UNIX program?
Yeah.  Is it fun?

[Audience member: (Indiscernible)]

Yeah.  You have to write parsers.  You have to figure out how the
command lines work and all this other stuff.  Try to manipulate Git
from a program.  It is terrible.  I just did it.  It is not fun.

What else is an example of that?  SQL.  In both these cases, they
wanted to support - so some person is going to be sitting at their
computer, and they are going to want to, like, do stuff.  And they are
going to go [gesturing typing on a keyboard] and go, and it is got to
work.  And there is nothing wrong with that.  That use case is
important.  You want to make that happen.

But when the _only_ interface you define is the one for that, you end
up with no programmatic interface.  So what do we have in SQL?  We
have, well, this is simple.  People will say where and blah, and that
is really great.  And what do we have for programs?  String building.
We have got nothing.  We have nothing to work on.

So build your human interface on top of a programmatic interface,
because programmatic interfaces are all you have got in the systems
level.  Nobody is typing into Amazon AWS services.  No one is like,
oh, I am going to, like, use S3.  You know, they do not do that.  So
you want to have the programmatic interface underneath.

[Time 0:58:50]

The systems failure model is the only failure model.  You have to look
at all of your error handling from that perspective.  And, as soon as
you do, you realize there are not going to be a lot of places for the
"I made a mistake" flow.  It has got to be dominated by the system as
partially unavailable flow.

Systems are dynamic and data driven.  It might be a nice idea to use a
language that was also dynamic and data driven.  Again, in this room, I
do not need to say that.


[Time 0:59:17]

```
slide title: Call to Action

+ Consider building simple services

  rather than language libs

+ Try to avoid bespoke protocols and formats

+ Consider the abstraction of your service

+ Design to be composed
```

So, I think people are building some great libraries.  I would love to
see more people build some services, some simple services.  I think
this is a tremendous opportunity area for Clojure.  Clojure is really,
really well suited to building these things.  And if you build these
things, it is going to give you the inroads into your organizations.

Oh, can I build this new thing in Clojure?  I do not know.  Well, I
built this service.  Do you want to use it?  Oh, well, yeah.  What
does it do?  It does this.  Oh, it is nice.  It is simple.  It does
this one thing.

And we are seeing some of that, like the Riemann thing, right?  Who
even knows Clojure?  Well, you know, it is this cool logging thing.
But it does one job.  It does it really well.  It is a service-like
thing.

There are tons of opportunities.  We just saw a bunch of things that
were done, and Storm is really great and things like that, but there
are lots more.  And when you build something like that, you are going
to end up with something that is much more reusable than a library.

Now things will have to be libraries, and libraries are great.  But I
would encourage you to build systems.  I would encourage you, when you
do it, to avoid custom formats.  Of course, again, in this room, I do
not really need to say that.  There is a good format.  We tend to all
like it, and we will try that first.

Even though you do not necessarily have a means of expressing at the
system level, the abstraction of your service, design it anyway.  You
know, there is always all this stuff about premature abstraction,
whatever.  Definitely it is a danger.  By the time you are writing a
service, there is nothing premature about abstraction.  The thing has
got a surface area this big.  You are going to spend time on that.
There is no problem spending time on that.  It is never not worth it.
It is never going to be, oh, it is overkill.  You know, you wrap this
thing with the thing.

You know, down in the small in a program, you can over-abstract.  Up
here, you cannot.  Up here, I mean, unless you start making a lot of
new layers, but for your service you want to have some abstraction.
Consider a second implementation of your interface.  Maybe you have
decided, for speed, you are going to use Avro or something like that.
But if you also design an HTTP interface, you will sort out your
abstraction just by that exercise.  It still does not give somebody
the ability to say: I am going to make something like it with the same
shape.  But it will make your service better.

And the other thing is to design your service to be composed.  And
again, I think this is a challenging area.  Do not keep adding stuff
inside yourself.  You are going to make a little monolith.  You are
going to become a stack, yourself.  You do not want to become a stack.
You want to allow people to plug in.

If you need to store stuff, consider using something like jclouds.
Now you do not need to store.  Disks are terrible.  Who wants to write
and program disks?  Ugh!  You know, it is a solved problem.  So as
soon as you get to the "Oh, I need to put something somewhere," plug
in something like jclouds or anything.  You can roll your own,
whatever.

It has to make sense for your thing.  But make it so that somebody
does not say, "Oh, I am taking you on, and I am taking on the fact
that you store stuff over here."  Do not do that.  Let them say, "This
is how I want you to store."  Let them make things composable.  Let
them say: this is the kind of queue I want you to use.  This is the
kind of storage I want you to use.  To the extent you can do that, you
will build components that can become parts of systems that are built
of services that are simple.

And that is it.

[Audience applause]

[Time 1:02:38]
