# Introduction

I will try to keep these links valid, but of course Internet searches
for the title and authors, and/or the [Internet Archive Wayback
Machine](https://archive.org/), may help you find results if they
become stale.

This is a list of articles (or longer works) attempting to explain the
benefits of functional programming, meaning: using a programming
language that encourages or requires immutable data and pure
functions.  For example, Haskell nearly restricts you to these things,
whereas Clojure makes it straightforward and idiomatic to write most
of your code in this way, while mixing in bits of mutability and side
effects where you find it uesful.

Nice to do some time: Add notes of page/word count for these, or
durations of recordings, so people wanting a quick read can have an
idea of what they are getting into.  Also add a few notes of the
background knowledge expected by each.


## Why use functional programming?

+ Part 1: Kris Jenkins, "What is Functional Programming?", 2015
  http://blog.jenkster.com/2015/12/what-is-functional-programming.html
  1900 words

+ Part 2: Kris Jenkins "Which Programming Languages Are Functional?", 2015
  http://blog.jenkster.com/2015/12/which-programming-languages-are-functional.html
  2300 words

Author's note: "This is my take on what functional programming really
is, in a way that will make sense to a jobbing programmer just trying
to Get Stuff Done."


+ Mary Rose Cook, "A practical introduction to functional programming", 2014 (?)
  https://maryrosecook.com/blog/post/a-practical-introduction-to-functional-programming 3600 words


+ Ben Moseley, Peter Marks, "Out of the Tar Pit", 2006
  http://curtclifton.net/papers/MoseleyMarks06a.pdf


+ Audio recording of interview: "John Hughes on Why Functional
  Programming Matters!", 2010
  https://www.infoq.com/interviews/john-hughes-fp 38 minutes


+ John Hughes, "Why Functional Programming Matters", 1989
  https://www.cs.kent.ac.uk/people/staff/dat/miranda/whyfp90.pdf

ACM Digital library link (not a link to the paper unless you pay, or are an ACM member): https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=63411



+ John Backus, "Can Programming Be Liberated from the von Neumann Style?
  A Functional Style and Its Algebra of Programs", 1978
  https://www.thocp.net/biographies/papers/backus_turingaward_lecture.pdf

This is an article version of John Backus's Turing Award lecture.


+ Philip Nilsson, "Git is a purely functional data structure", 2013
  https://blog.jayway.com/2013/03/03/git-is-a-purely-functional-data-structure/



## Other related works

TBD: Consider these for inclusion in the list above.  I haven't read
them yet.

http://www.haskellforall.com/2012/08/the-category-design-pattern.html

https://www.business2community.com/brandviews/upwork/functional-programming-what-is-it-and-why-does-it-matter-02131733

Critique of functional programming: Erik Meijer, "The Curse of the
Excluded Middle", 2014 https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2611829


James Hague, "Programming in the twenty-first century", series of blog articles
https://prog21.dadgum.com/

(James Hague may be more in the pro-functional programming than
against camp.  I haven't read enough of his articles to know yet.  His
article "Do You Really Want to be Doing This When You're 50?" could be
taken as examples of why lots of today's programming is draining on
one's mind in the long term.  Rich Hickey's motivation for creating
Clojure was to find a way to do programming that he would still want
to do it, versus give up on programming and do something else, because
it was too difficult for reasons of the way the programming languages
work.)



More off-topic and maybe should be in a separate list: Design Patterns
in Lisp family languages:

http://mishadoff.com/blog/clojure-design-patterns/
